# 8 reasons why we need to phase out the fossil fuel industry

Fossil fuel corporations are profiting from the continued consumption of coal,
oil and gas, which are driving global warming to dangerous levels, but the
industry’s bad behavior doesn’t stop with greenhouse gas emissions. Here are 8
reasons why we need a fossil fuel phase out.

Fossil fuel corporations are profiting from the continued consumption of coal,
oil and gas, which are driving global warming to dangerous levels. A
Greenpeace report illustrated the need for [managed phase out of fossil fuel
production](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-phaseout/) as
part of any comprehensive climate policy effort like a Green New Deal. The
report shows that without specific policies to constrain fossil fuel supply,
then a significant fraction of emissions reductions achieved by policies to
reduce demand for fossil fuels could be wiped out.[1]

But the fossil fuel industry’s bad behavior doesn’t stop with greenhouse gas
emissions. Fossil fuel companies are also responsible for significant air and
water pollution. The[ burden of this pollution is borne most heavily by low-
income and communities of
color](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/) — and
by the industry’s own workers. Fossil fuel companies have also misled the
public about the impacts of climate change, [corrupted our
democracy](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/campaigns/democracy/), and
attacked renewable energy solutions.

### Here are eight reasons why we should kick off a managed decline of the
fossil fuel industry.

## 1\. Fossil fuel companies are wrecking our climate

**The science is clear** : we cannot continue burning coal, oil, and gas if we
are going to avoid the worst impacts of the climate crisis. We need to take
transformative action in the next decade to completely phase out fossil fuel
production and transition our economy to 100% renewable energy.

If we are able to limit global warming to 1.5°C (2.7°F) above pre-industrial
levels, we will reduce the risk of extreme heat waves, heavy precipitation,
droughts, sea-level rise, polar melting, expanding health risks, and other
dangerous climate impacts worldwide.2] Here in the U.S., the climate crisis is
already worsening “existing vulnerabilities in communities” and presenting
“growing challenges to human health and safety, quality of life, and the rate
of economic growth.”[3] Studies have shown if nothing is done to halt
emissions, climate change could cost the U.S. $500 billion every year by
2090.[4]

To successfully limit warming to 1.5°C, we must take dramatic action over the
next decade. Globally, we must cut planet-warming greenhouse gas pollution “by
about 45% from 2010 levels by 2030,” and reach net-zero emissions by 2050.[5]
Due to our responsibility for a large portion of historical emissions, the
U.S. can and should reduce our emissions at an even faster pace.[6]

Every new ton of greenhouse gas emissions pushes global temperatures closer to
the 1.5°C limit, and the amount of carbon we can emit without going over that
limit is referred to as our “carbon budget.” At current rates of emissions,
the remaining budget will be exhausted in only 12-15 years.[7] Yet fossil fuel
corporations have discovered roughly five times more oil, gas, and coal
reserves than we can afford to burn and still limit warming to 1.5°C. Already,
the amount of carbon found in fossil fuel production projects currently moving
forward (known as “developed reserves”) is more than enough to warm the planet
to dangerous levels.[8]

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/ca3cee34-ppt_fig_oci_budgets.png)

CO2 Emissions from Developed Fossil Fuel Reserves, Compared to Carbon Budgets
(as of Jan. 2018) within range of the Paris Goals. (Source: Muttitt 2016. Oil
Change.)

Those reserves also represent billions of dollars in profits for fossil fuel
executives and shareholders. As continued burning of coal, oil, and gas drives
us toward planetary disaster, fossil fuel companies are recklessly digging us
into a deeper hole by expanding investments in fossil fuel extraction, rather
than the fossil fuel phase out that workers and communities at the frontlines
of the climate emergency desperately need.

## 2\. Fossil fuel companies are spending to lock-in climate pollution

Despite the urgent warnings from climate scientists, billions of investment
dollars continue to flow to dirty energy companies. Total global investment in
energy added up to $1.8 trillion in 2018, of which 35% (~$630 billion) went
towards low-carbon energy, and the remainder (~$1.2 trillion) went to fossil
fuels.[9] One out of every 10 energy dollars (roughly $170 billion in 2018)
goes to fossil fuel supply projects _in the U.S. alone_ , driving the rapid
increase in U.S. oil and gas production in recent years.

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/b8def406-tmp_wei1.png)

Global energy investment in 2018 and change compared to 2017. (Source: IEA,
World Energy Investment 2019)

Achieving the 1.5°C target will require a radical reallocation of capital from
fossil energy to low-carbon solutions.[10] Unfortunately low-carbon investment
has “stalled in recent years and needs a rapid boost to keep [our climate
goals] in sight.”[11] On the other hand, oil and gas companies are forecast to
spend $4.9 trillion in capital expenditures on new oil and gas projects over
the next decade — investments which could lock-in emissions that break the
carbon budget and push global warming beyond 1.5°C.[12]

## 3\. Fossil fuel companies cause deadly air pollution

In addition to releasing planet-warming greenhouse gas emissions, burning
fossil fuels also generates localized air pollutants — such as soot (fine
particulate matter, or PM2.5) and smog (ozone) — that increase the risk of
death from stroke, heart disease, lung cancer, and respiratory illness among
those exposed. Air pollution from fossil fuel production and consumption
disproportionately affects communities of color and low-income — clearly
perpetuating environmental injustices.[13] The World Health Organization
estimates that ambient exposure to PM2.5 leads to around 4 million deaths
worldwide every year (not counting exposure from indoor air pollution).[14] In
the U.S., clean air rules have reduced this public health threat over
time,[15] but tens of thousands of Americans still die every year from air
pollution.[16] Trump’s attempted rollback of clean air protections could lead
to 80,000 additional deaths every decade.[17] Studies have shown that a “rapid
phaseout of fossil-fuel-related emissions” could “save millions of lives.”[18]

## 4\. Fossil fuel companies cause water pollution

Time and time again, oil spills and explosions have wreaked havoc on water,
land, and homes and communities. Major incidents — such as BP’s Deepwater
Horizon catastrophe, which spilled 4.9 million barrels of oil into the Gulf of
Mexico,[19] or Enbridge’s massive tar sands spill into the Kalamazoo River[20]
— show that there is no failsafe way to extract, process, or transport fossil
fuels. Where there is drilling, there is inevitably spilling,[21] and too
often, these disasters have put marginalized communities under threat. In the
last several years, an Indigenous-led movement of water protectors and allies
has risen up to oppose risky, climate-wrecking pipeline projects across the
country such as Dakota Access, Keystone XL, and the Line 3 expansion.
Additionally, the oil and gas boom has put groundwater at risk from wastewater
contamination[22] and has consumed scarce water resources.[23] Coal too can
contaminate water resources during the mining process and via unregulated coal
ash impoundments.[24]

![Tar Sands Oil Pipeline
Spills](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/2d1aa062-tarsands-pipeline-spills-map-5.png)

Map of 373 U.S. hazardous liquids pipelines spills from 2010 to present for
TransCanada (green), Kinder Morgan (purple) and Enbridge (blue). Available
online at greenpeace.carto.com. Data: PHMSA & EIA.

## 5\. Fossil fuel companies perpetuate environmental injustice

The burdens of both climate change and conventional pollution fall more
heavily on low-income communities and communities of color. Numerous studies
have shown that toxic waste sites are more likely to be found in vulnerable
communities[25] and the same is true of coal fired power plants.[26] Race and
poverty also predict higher exposure to harmful PM2.5 air pollution.[27]
Climate change will also have a highly unequal impact across the world. A
recent U.N. study found that climate change could “push more than 120 million
more people into poverty by 2030 and will have the most severe impact in poor
countries, regions, and the places poor people live and work.”[28]

## 6\. Fossil fuel companies don’t treat workers fairly

Workers in these industries have often not received fair treatment either.
Occupational data show that the upstream oil and gas industry has “one of the
highest rates of severe injuries in the country,”[29] and after years of
decline, black lung disease has made a comeback and is now afflicting
Appalachian coal miners “earlier and in a more deadly form than ever
before.”[30]

As the coal industry has gone into long-term decline, workers have found that
promises made by their corporate bosses have not been kept. In Appalachia,
recent years have shown that “as [coal] companies declare bankruptcy,
executives get healthy bonuses, polluted coal mines are abandoned, and miners
and retirees are denied long-promised health benefits and pensions.”[31] With
the recent abrupt closure of two coal mines in Wyoming, the same pattern
appears to be playing out there as well. This is why a just transition must be
put in place to ensure that workers and communities are left better off as we
phase out fossil fuel production.[32]

## 7\. Fossil fuel companies have misled the public about the climate threat

Fossil corporations have known about the scale of the climate threat for
decades, but far from warning the public, they spent millions on a campaign to
sow doubt and disinformation, leading to decades of delay. Journalists have
uncovered documents indicating that industry leaders were funding research
into atmospheric CO2 as early as the 1950s and produced a 1968 report to the
American Petroleum Institute that starkly warned of the threat of rising
temperatures due to carbon pollution.[33] In the late 70s and early 80s, Exxon
was funding cutting-edge climate change science,[34] but by the 1990s the
company had pivoted to publishing misleading op-eds[35] and funding a network
of climate deniers that works to block meaningful climate action to this
day.[36] In recent years, other fossil fuel interests, such as the Charles and
David Koch, have continued to fund denial and delay.[37]

As a result of these actions, what could have been a manageable economic
transition to 100% renewable energy has become an urgent planetary crisis,
putting the lives of millions under threat while time runs short to solve the
problem.

## 8\. Fossil fuel companies are attacking solutions, while raking in tax
breaks

Today, many fossil fuel companies are shifting away from blatant climate
denial, claiming to accept the findings of climate science, and perhaps
voicing weak support for inadequate policies.[38] When push comes to shove the
industry opens its pocket book to defeat any policies that might impact their
bottom line. The Koch network has taken aim at climate-friendly policies such
as net metering for rooftop solar, and more recently, the tax credit for
electric vehicles.[39] When strong climate initiatives made the ballots in
Colorado and Washington in 2018, the industry spent millions to defeat
them.[40] In July 2019, fossil fuel interests pushed through a bill in the
Ohio legislature that bailed-out money-losing coal plants while gutting
renewable energy and efficiency standards.[41]

The fossil fuel industry has spent[42] millions of dollars in lobbying[43] and
campaign contributions[44] to block any concerted climate action at the
federal and state level. So far, this decades-long investment in influencing
our political system is paying off. The fossil fuel industry continues to
receive around $20 billion in federal and state production subsidies every
year,[45] and reaped billions in additional tax savings from Trump’s 2017 tax
cut legislation.[46]

It is clear that the current business model of the fossil fuel industry is
putting all of us in harm’s way, but in particular, [low-income, Indigenous,
and communities of color who are on the frontlines of pollution and climate
chaos](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/issues/environmental-justice/).
Fossil fuel interests are still one of the main barriers to the passage of
comprehensive climate policies in the U.S. It is time for the industry to face
a reckoning.

**References**

  1. Donaghy, T. 2019. _Real Climate Leadership: Why The Next President Must Prioritize A Fossil Fuel Phase Out_. Greenpeace, June. [[link](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-phaseout/)]
  2. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). 2018. _Special Report: Global Warming of 1.5 ºC (SR15)_. Chapter 3: Impacts of 1.5°C global warming on natural and human systems. [[link](https://www.ipcc.ch/report/sr15/)]
  3. U.S. Global Change Research Program. 2018. _Fourth National Climate Assessment (NCA4). Volume II: Impacts, Risks, and Adaptation in the United States_. [[link](https://nca2018.globalchange.gov/)]
  4. Martinich, J. & A. Crimmins. 2019. Climate damages and adaptation potential across diverse sectors of the United States. _Nature Climate Change_ , 9:397–404. [[link](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41558-019-0444-6)]
  5. IPCC. 2018. SR15. Chapter 2: Mitigation pathways compatible with 1.5°C in the context of sustainable development.
  6. Climate Action Tracker. Country Summary: USA. [[link](https://climateactiontracker.org/countries/usa/)]
  7. Rogelj, J. & P. Forster. 2019. A new approach for understanding the remaining carbon budget. _Carbon Brief_ , July 17. [[link](https://www.carbonbrief.org/guest-post-a-new-approach-for-understanding-the-remaining-carbon-budget)]
  8. Muttitt, G. 2016. _The Sky’s Limit: Why The Paris Climate Goals Require a Managed Decline of Fossil Fuel Production_. Oil Change International, September. [[link](http://priceofoil.org/content/uploads/2016/09/OCI_the_skys_limit_2016_FINAL_2.pdf)]
  9. International Energy Agency (IEA). World Energy Investment 2019 (WEI2019). [[link](https://www.iea.org/wei2019/)]
  10. McCollum et al. 2018. Energy investment needs for fulfilling the Paris Agreement and achieving the Sustainable Development Goals. _Nature Energy_ , 3:589–599. [[link](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41560-018-0179-z)]
  11. WEI2019.
  12. Global Witness. 2019. _Overexposed: How the IPCC’s 1.5°C report demonstrates the risks of overinvestment in oil and gas_. April 23. [[link](https://www.globalwitness.org/en/campaigns/oil-gas-and-mining/overexposed/)]
  13. Mikati et al. 2018. Disparities in Distribution of Particulate Matter Emission Sources by Race and Poverty Status. _American Journal of Public Health,_ 108:480-485. [[link](https://ajph.aphapublications.org/doi/pdf/10.2105/AJPH.2017.304297)]
  14. World Health Organization. 2018. 9 out of 10 people worldwide breathe polluted air, but more countries are taking action. May 2. [[link](https://www.who.int/news-room/detail/02-05-2018-9-out-of-10-people-worldwide-breathe-polluted-air-but-more-countries-are-taking-action)]
  15. American Lung Association. 2019. State of the Air. [[link](http://www.stateoftheair.org/)]
  16. Zhang et al. 2018. Long-term trends in the ambient PM2.5- and O3-related mortality burdens in the United States under emission reductions from 1990 to 2010. _Atmos. Chem. Phys_ , 18:1–14. [[link](https://www.eenews.net/assets/2018/10/22/document_pm_01.pdf)]
  17. Cutler, D. & F. Dominici. 2018. A Breath of Bad Air: Cost of the Trump Environmental Agenda May Lead to 80 000 Extra Deaths per Decade. _JAMA_. 319(22):2261-2262. doi:10.1001/jama.2018.7351. [[link](https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/2684596)]
  18. Lelieveld et al. 2019. Effects of fossil fuel and total anthropogenic emission removal on public health and climate. _PNAS_ , 116(15):7192-7197. [[link](https://www.pnas.org/content/116/15/7192)]
  19. Adams, A. 2015. _Summary of Information concerning the Ecological and Economic Impacts of the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill Disaster_. Natural Resources Defence Council, June. [[link](https://www.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/gulfspill-impacts-summary-IP.pdf)]
  20. McGowan, E. & L. Song. 2012. The Dilbit Disaster: Inside The Biggest Oil Spill You’ve Never Heard Of, Part 1. _InsideClimate News_ , June 26. [[link](https://insideclimatenews.org/news/20120626/dilbit-diluted-bitumen-enbridge-kalamazoo-river-marshall-michigan-oil-spill-6b-pipeline-epa)]
  21. Donaghy, T. 2017. _4 Proposed Tar Sands Oil Pipelines Pose a Threat to Water Resources_. Greenpeace, August. [[link](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/research/four-proposed-tar-sands-oil-pipelines-pose-a-threat-to-water-resources/)]
  22. King, P. 2018. A decade of fracking research: What have we learned? _EnergyWire_ , July 11. [[link](https://www.eenews.net/energywire/2018/07/11/stories/1060087955)]
  23. Ridlington, E., K. Norman & R. Richardson. 2016. _Fracking by the Numbers: The Damage to Our Water, Land and Climate from a Decade of Dirty Drilling_. Environment America, April. [[link](https://environmentamerica.org/sites/environment/files/reports/Fracking%20by%20the%20Numbers%20vUS.pdf)]
  24. Earthjustice. Coal Ash: Reports & Publications. [[link](https://earthjustice.org/features/campaigns/coal-ash-reports-and-publications)]
  25. Bullard, R., P. Mohai, R. Saha & B. Wright. 2007. _Toxic Wastes and Race at Twenty 1987-2007_. United Church of Christ Justice & Witness Ministries, March. [[link](https://www.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/toxic-wastes-and-race-at-twenty-1987-2007.pdf)]
  26. Wilson, A. 2012. _Coal Blooded: Putting Profits Before People_. NAACP, April. [[link](https://www.naacp.org/climate-justice-resources/coal-blooded/)]
  27. Mikati et al. 2018
  28. U.N. Special Rapporteur on extreme poverty and human rights. 2019. Climate change and poverty. June 25. United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights. [[link](https://www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=24735&LangID=E)]
  29. Soraghan, M. 2017. Oil and gas industry leads in severe injuries. _EnergyWire_. May 2. [[link](https://www.eenews.net/stories/1060053892)]
  30. Wei-Haas, M. 2017. Why Black Lung Disease Is Deadlier Than Ever Before. _Smithsonian_ , May 15. [[link](https://www.smithsonianmag.com/science-nature/black-lung-disease-deadlier-than-ever-before-180963303/)]
  31. Roberts, D. 2019. Coal left Appalachia devastated. Now it’s doing the same to Wyoming. _Vox_ , July 9. [[link](https://www.vox.com/energy-and-environment/2019/7/9/20684815/coal-wyoming-bankruptcy-blackjewel-appalachia)]
  32. Donaghy 2019.
  33. Center for International Environmental Law. Smoke and Fumes. [[link](https://www.smokeandfumes.org/fumes)]
  34. Banerjee, N, L. Song, & D. Hasmyer. 2015. Exxon: The Road Not Taken. _InsideClimate News_. [[link](https://insideclimatenews.org/content/Exxon-The-Road-Not-Taken)]
  35. Supran, G. & N. Oreskes. 2017. Assessing ExxonMobil’s climate change communications (1977–2014). _Env. Res. Lett._ , 12 084019. [[link](https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1748-9326/aa815f)]
  36. Exxon Secrets. ExxonMobil Climate Denial Funding 1998-2014. [[link](https://exxonsecrets.org/)]
  37. Greenpeace USA. Exposing Climate Deniers. [[link](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/global-warming/climate-deniers/)]
  38. Hulac, B. & K. Brugger. 2018. How much is Big Oil working to pass a carbon tax? We checked. _ClimateWire_ , September 26. [[link](https://www.eenews.net/climatewire/2018/09/26/stories/1060099745)]
  39. Negin, E. 2018. Will Koch Pull the Plug on Electric Cars? _Union of Concerned Scientists_ , December 5. [[link](https://blog.ucsusa.org/elliott-negin/will-koch-pull-the-plug-on-electric-cars)]
  40. Roberts, D. 2018. Fossil fuel money crushed clean energy ballot initiatives across the country. _Vox_ , November 11. [[link](https://www.vox.com/energy-and-environment/2018/11/7/18069940/election-results-2018-energy-carbon-fracking-ballot-initiatives)]
  41. Roberts, D. 2019. Ohio just passed the worst energy bill of the 21st century. _Vox_ , July 27. [[link](https://www.vox.com/energy-and-environment/2019/7/27/8910804/ohio-gop-nuclear-coal-plants-renewables-efficiency-hb6)]
  42. InfluenceMap. 2019. _Big Oil’s Real Agenda on Climate Change_. March. [[link](https://influencemap.org/report/How-Big-Oil-Continues-to-Oppose-the-Paris-Agreement-38212275958aa21196dae3b76220bddc)]
  43. Brulle, R.J. 2018. The climate lobby: a sectoral analysis of lobbying spending on climate change in the USA, 2000 to 2016. _Climatic Change_ , 149:289. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-018-2241-z [[link](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10584-018-2241-z)]
  44. Open Secrets. Oil & Gas. [[link](https://www.opensecrets.org/industries/indus.php?ind=e01)]
  45. Redman, J. 2017. _Dirty Energy Dominance_. Oil Change International, October. [[link](http://priceofoil.org/content/uploads/2017/10/OCI_US-Fossil-Fuel-Subs-2015-16_Final_Oct2017.pdf)]
  46. Juhasz, A. 2018. Inside the Tax Bill’s $25 Billion Oil Company Bonanza. _Pacific Standard_ , March 27. [[link](https://psmag.com/economics/tax-bill-oil-company-bonanza)]

_Originally published on September 3, 2019; revised on November 22, 2021._

