# “Anti-Greta” climate denier Naomi Seibt marched with Neo-Nazis and promotes white nationalism

What journalists and the climate movement need to know about the Heartland
Institute’s new contractor and contrarian Youtuber, Naomi Seibt.

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2025/01/f2446165-naomi_seibt_anti_greta_at_neo_nazi_1000_white_crosses_march_munich_germany_2018_w_highlight.jpg)Photo
credit: @antifalinkems, via wiedertaeufer.ms

Over the last week, The Heartland Institute – an infamous climate denial think
tank – has been rolled with not one, but two scandals.

HuffPost’s Alexander Kaufman
[revealed](https://www.huffpost.com/entry/heartland-institute-staff-layoffs-
climate-change-denial_n_5e6302a6c5b6670e72f85fa5) that the Heartland Institute
laid off more than half of its staff, who accuse Heartland leadership of
financial mismanagement.

But HuffPost called out something else that went
[unmentioned](https://www.mediaite.com/news/conservative-think-tank-
dispatches-german-teenager-dubbed-anti-greta-to-speak-at-cpac/) by
[far](https://www.insider.com/conservative-hires-youtuber-naomi-seibt-
challenge-greta-thunberg-climate-crisis-2020-2) too
[many](https://nypost.com/2020/02/25/conservative-group-hires-german-teen-
naomi-seibt-to-rival-greta-thunbergs-climate-views/) media
[outlets](https://www.masslive.com/politics/2020/02/naomi-seibt-dubbed-the-
anti-greta-thunberg-to-make-us-debut-at-this-weeks-conservative-political-
action-conference.html):

### Heartland’s[ contractor](https://correctiv.org/en/top-stories-
en/2020/02/11/the-heartland-lobby/) and YouTube personality [Naomi
Seibt](https://www.desmogblog.com/naomi-seibt) marched with Neo-Nazis and
promotes white nationalists unapologetically.

According to Heartland’s recently-departed staff, Naomi Seibt was seen as a
ticket out of Heartland’s financial troubles. It is unclear if Heartland is
okay with Seibt’s history of marching with violent racists and promoting white
ethnocentrism could end out being more trouble for Heartland than she is worth
as a fresh new voice for climate deniers to rally around.

The 19-year old Seibt was coined the “[Anti-
Greta](https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2020/feb/28/naomi-seibt-anti-
greta-activist-white-nationalist-inspiration)” by Heartland, which wants a
puffed-up foil to Greta Thunberg. Thunberg, the 17-year old global sensation,
has dedicated her life to broadcasting the increasing urgency of the climate
crisis. Thunburg’s statements are consistent with what scientists have
attempted to warn us for decades, as she meticulously read reports by the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). Seibt simply rejects the
warnings of scientists, choosing instead to broadcast her contrarian opinions
on YouTube.

And that’s not where the differences between these two ends. We’ve pulled
together a research brief on Seibt to help journalists and allies.

### Naomi Seibt marched with Neo-Nazis in 2018:

The photo above was[ taken](https://wiedertaeufer.ms/muensteraner-youtuberin-
naomi-seibt-nachwuchshoffnung-der-neuen-rechten/) by Anti-Fascist activists in
Münster, Germany, at a 2018 anti-abortion march that involved a contingency of
Neo-Nazis, including [Robert
Malcoci](https://translate.googleusercontent.com/translate_c?depth=1&hl=en&prev=search&rurl=translate.google.com&sl=de&sp=nmt4&u=https://muensterlandrechtsaussen.blackblogs.org/2018/04/10/neonazi-
und-kader-der-identitaeren-bewegung-bei-der-muensterer-burschenschaft-
franconia/&usg=ALkJrhhCXDDsLj7tm9WLLYeVhzqHnyrctg) of the [Neo-Nazi Malcoci
family](http://ibwatchout.blogsport.de/2016/01/20/familie-malcoci-und-die-
verbindungen-der-identitaeren-bewegung-zur-alten-rechten/). The “1,000 White
Crosses” rally, or 1000 Kreuze Marsch, in German, was not organized by Neo-
Nazis, but it included at least one bloc of people from such groups, as the
photo above shows.

This March 4, 2020
[post](https://muensterlandrechtsaussen.blackblogs.org/2020/03/04/just-a-girl-
meet-naomi-seibt-a-far-right-influencer-from-muenster/) from the German
website Münsterland rechtsaußen includes more information and references on
the 1000 Kreuze Marsch:

**“Alongside Seibt marched members of the ‘Identitarian Movement’ and the
‘Fraternity Franconia,’ a local far-right fraternity. Amongst them Robert
Malcoci, a well-known neo-Nazi and activist of the ‘Identitarian Movement.’
[3,4] Following her participation in this fundamentalist rally, she posted a
video about the ‘Pride Weeks’ where she addressed her concerns about
homosexuality and the LGBTQI * community.”**

On February 28, 2020, Seibt denied attending any Neo-Nazi rallies, when
[questioned on
camera](https://twitter.com/JamieMCorey/status/1233498677760663552) by Jamie
Corey at Documented–a watchdog group that I frequently collaborate with.

At
[#CPAC2020](https://twitter.com/hashtag/CPAC2020?src=hash&ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw),
I asked “Anti-Greta”
[@SeibtNaomi](https://twitter.com/SeibtNaomi?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw)—who works
for the climate denial, Mercer-funded
[@HeartlandInst](https://twitter.com/HeartlandInst?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw)—about
anti-semitic comments that came to light in the
[@Guardian](https://twitter.com/guardian?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw). Here’s what she
said. [pic.twitter.com/dNmUBDTpnJ](https://t.co/dNmUBDTpnJ) — Jamie Corey
(@JamieMCorey) [February 28,
2020](https://twitter.com/JamieMCorey/status/1233498677760663552?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw)

What struck me most about Seibt’s reaction to the question was this indication
that Seibt doesn’t believe you can be “100% German” if you are Jewish or
Muslim:

**“I don’t care if you’re a Jew, or a Muslim, or 100% German.”**

### Naomi Seibt’s anti-semitic comment after Yom Kippur synagogue shooting

Thanks in particular to a[
report](https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2020/feb/28/naomi-seibt-anti-
greta-activist-white-nationalist-inspiration) for The Guardian by Stephanie
Kirchgaessner and Emily Holden, U.S. press began catching on to Sebit’s ties
to white nationalists.

The article included a comment made by Seibt in an online video following a[
shooting at a Synagogue in Germany during Yom
Kippur](https://www.newyorker.com/news/letter-from-europe/a-terrorist-attack-
on-yom-kippur-in-halle-germany):

**In a YouTube discussion last year that was highlighted in a report by the
German broadcaster ZDF, Seibt discussed an[ attack on a synagogue in
Halle](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2019/oct/10/halle-attack-homemade-
guns-jammed-repeatedly-video-shows) that killed two people who were outside
the temple, and said Jews were considered to be “at the top” of groups who
were seen as being oppressed. “Ordinary Germans”, she said, were “at the
bottom”. Muslims, she added, were somewhere in between.**

**The remarks were part of a video discussion that appears to have been
deleted. They were seen by some experts as saying that Germans had less pity
for “ordinary German” victims of crime than for Jews and Muslims. A[ portion
of the discussion was included in a report by
ZDF](https://www.zdf.de/politik/frontal-21/nach-dem-anschlag-in-
halle-100.html) and is still available online.**

A longer translation of this quote was reported by Jennifer Dhlouy for[
Bloomberg](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-02-28/anti-greta-
blasts-climate-alarmism-to-conservative-gathering):

**“The normal German consumer is at the bottom, so to speak. Then the Muslims
come somewhere in between. And the Jew is at the top. That is the suppression
characteristic,” she said in comments first reported by The Guardian.**

### Naomi Seibt praise for Canadian white nationalist

The Guardian
[article](https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2020/feb/28/naomi-seibt-
anti-greta-activist-white-nationalist-inspiration) by Kirchgaessner and Holden
included another concerning statement made by Seibt regarding a well known
White Nationalist in Canada. The article was published the same day that Seibt
spoke on a panel at the annual Conservative Political Action Conference, or
CPAC, hosted by the American Conservative Union.

In another YouTube interview describing her embrace of “views that were
outside the mainstream”, Seibt referred to the Canadian alt-right internet
activist Stefan Molyneux as an “inspiration”.

Molyneux has been described as an “[alleged cult leader who amplifies
scientific racism, eugenics and white
supremacism](https://www.splcenter.org/fighting-hate/extremist-
files/individual/stefan-molyneux)” by the Southern Poverty Law Center, which
monitors extremism and white supremacy.

Business Insider reporter Anthony L. Fisher was at CPAC and[ asked Seibt about
her praise for Molyneux](https://www.businessinsider.com/anti-greta-climate-
activist-naomi-seibt-fan-stefan-molyneux-cpac-2020-2):

During a Q&A session, Insider read Molyneux’s following quote to Seibt: “I’ve
always been skeptical of the ideas of white nationalism, of identitarianism
and white identity. However, I am an empiricist, and I could not help but
notice that I could have peaceful, free, easy, civilized, and safe discussions
in what is essentially an all-white country.”

Insider asked Seibt if she was aware of Molyneux’s statement and, if so, still
considered herself a fan of his.

“I am still a fan of Molyneux’s, absolutely,” Seibt replied.

Following this reporting, acknowledgement of Seibt’s support for White
Nationalism was picked up by the[ Washington
Post](https://www.washingtonpost.com/climate-environment/2020/02/29/anti-
climate-activist-praises-white-nationalist-cpac/), the[ New York
Times](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/02/28/us/politics/trump-cpac.html),[
HuffPost](https://www.huffpost.com/entry/naomi-seibt-white-nationalist-cpac-
stefan-molyneux_n_5e5974c5c5b6450a30be4a4d), and global outlets like the[ UK
Daily Mail](https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-8058873/German-teen-
climate-change-realist-known-anti-Greta-slams-alarmists-conference.html) and[
Yahoo! News Australia](https://au.news.yahoo.com/meet-the-anti-greta-who-
calls-herself-a-climate-realist-081549132.html).

### Naomi Seibt and the ethnopluralist “identitarian movement”

According to the March, 2020[
post](https://muensterlandrechtsaussen.blackblogs.org/2020/03/04/just-a-girl-
meet-naomi-seibt-a-far-right-influencer-from-muenster/) from Münsterland
rechtsaußen:

**All rhetorical whitewashing put aside, Seibt’s concept of nationalism
resembles the concept of “ethnopluralism” which is the main concept of the
“Identitarian Movement”, a far-right group from Europe. It is based on the
racist conspiracy theory of the “great replacement” by the French far-right
academic Renaud Camus. The far-right terrorists who carried out the attacks in
Christchurch, New Zealand, and in Halle, Germany, partially based their
manifestos on this racist, anti-Semitic and anti-feminist theory which is also
popular amongst the politicians, members and supporters of the “Alternative
for Germany” and other far-right movements in Germany. ([Google
translation](https://translate.google.com/translate?hl=en&sl=de&u=https://muensterlandrechtsaussen.blackblogs.org/category/muenster/&prev=search))**

### Naomi Seibt, Karoline Seibt, and the German AFD Party

The German [Alternative for Germany](https://www.dw.com/en/afd-what-you-need-
to-know-about-germanys-far-right-party/a-37208199) political party, aka
“Alternative für Deutschland” or AfD, is
[known](http://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-37274201) for its[ scapegoating
of Jews, Muslims, and refugees](https://www.dw.com/en/german-politicians-slam-
right-wing-populist-afd-over-rising-anti-semitism/a-50893368). The AfD’s
affiliates promote perspectives that [many Germans say contributed to
nationalist terrorist acts](https://www.reuters.com/article/us-germany-
shooting-polls/germanys-far-right-afd-loses-support-after-synagogue-shooting-
report-idUSKBN1WR0D3) like the Halle Synagogue shooting in October, 2019.

Naomi Seibt and her mother, Karoline Seibt, both have deep ties to the AfD
party. And as mentioned in the new[
HuffPost](https://www.huffpost.com/entry/heartland-institute-staff-layoffs-
climate-change-denial_n_5e6302a6c5b6670e72f85fa5) report,

**Her [Naomi Seibt] mother, Karoline Seibt, is[ an
attorney](https://www.k-seibt.de/) who works with Alternative für Deutschland,
Germany’s far-right nationalist party[ with
ties](https://www.politico.eu/article/afd-candidate-neo-nazi-march-athens-
andreas-kalbitz/) to neo-Nazis. In 2018, the mother[ was
pictured](https://trolesememoiren.wordpress.com/2019/05/13/der-maennliche-
stachel-im-feminisierten-fleisch-unserer-kultur/) partying with Milo
Yiannopoulos, the far-right former star columnist at Breitbart who, according
to[ BuzzFeed News](https://www.buzzfeednews.com/article/josephbernstein/heres-
how-breitbart-and-milo-smuggled-white-nationalism), pushed white nationalist
ideology into mainstream U.S. politics.**

We believe she is also the woman on the far right in this picture of Milo
Yiannopoulos from May 2019.

> Der neue Pressesprecher der CDU/CSU-Splittergruppe
> [@WerteUnion](https://twitter.com/WerteUnion?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw),
> [@Ralf_Hoecker](https://twitter.com/Ralf_Hoecker?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw), in
> guter Gesellschaft: Milo Yiannopoulos, David Berger, Oliver Flesch. Quelle:
> <https://t.co/FBrUfUkbQF>
> [pic.twitter.com/hR1erPsqgE](https://t.co/hR1erPsqgE)
>
> — Stefan Niggemeier (@niggi) [June 15,
> 2019](https://twitter.com/niggi/status/1140012329796608001?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw)

The Guardian’s David Smith was the first journalist in the U.S. to[
report](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2020/feb/25/anti-greta-teen-
activist-cpac-conference-climate-sceptic) on Seibt’s connections to the AfD
political party in Germany:

[Seibt] was pushed into the limelight by leading figures on the German far
right and her mother, a lawyer, has represented politicians from the[
Alternative für Deutschland](https://www.theguardian.com/world/alternative-
fur-deutschland-afd) (AfD) party in court.

Seibt had her first essay published by the “anti-Islamisation” blog
Philosophia Perennis and was championed by Martin Sellner,[ leader of the
Austrian Identitarian
Movement](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2019/may/16/christchurch-shooters-
links-to-austrian-far-right-more-extensive-than-thought), who has been denied
entry to the UK and US because of his political activism.

A Facebook post by the AfD youth wing names Seibt as a member and she spoke at
a recent AfD event, though she has denied membership of the party.

In May 2019 she posted her first video on YouTube, reading out verses
submitted for a poetry slam competition organised by the AfD.

The March, 2020[
post](https://muensterlandrechtsaussen.blackblogs.org/2020/03/04/just-a-girl-
meet-naomi-seibt-a-far-right-influencer-from-muenster/) from Münsterland
rechtsaußen mentions an AfD event featuring Seibt and another speaker who
appeared to express pride for his parents’ “achievements” during the Nazi
Germany era: (see[ Google
translation)](https://translate.google.com/translate?hl=en&sl=de&u=https://muensterlandrechtsaussen.blackblogs.org/category/muenster/&prev=search):

**[Naomi Seibt] was invited as a speaker to the New Year’s welcome event of
the local branch of the far-right party “Alternative for Germany” in February
2020 [7]. Rüdiger Lucassen, one of the speakers at the event stated that “we
are proud of the achievements of our mothers and fathers and not ashamed of
them”. [8] Since Lucassen was born in 1951, his parents were part of the
generation that enabled, supported and committed crimes during the reign of
the Nazis in Germany.**

More examples of Karoline and Naomi Seibt’s work with the AfD, and with white
nationalists, is chronicled by[ Correctiv](https://correctiv.org/en/latest-
stories/2020/03/10/wanted-influencer-young-right-wing), Münsterland
rechtsaußen
([here](https://muensterlandrechtsaussen.blackblogs.org/2019/08/22/243/) and[
here](https://muensterlandrechtsaussen.blackblogs.org/2020/03/04/just-a-girl-
meet-naomi-seibt-a-far-right-influencer-from-muenster/)), and[ Die
Wiedertäufer](https://wiedertaeufer.ms/muensteraner-youtuberin-naomi-seibt-
nachwuchshoffnung-der-neuen-rechten/).

### No more excuses to ignore Neo-Nazi ties

The confusion of Seibt’s sudden entrance to the U.S. media market and the
complications of translating material published in Germany are no longer an
excuse.

Heartland rejoiced at the initial U.S. press coverage of Seibt. The group[
rejoiced](http://archive.is/PDIET) over “fair” coverage in this Washington
Post that debuted Seibt to U.S. audiences before a speech at CPAC two weekends
ago. The article said nothing of Seibt’s thinly-veiled support for White
Nationalism.

Neither did Piers Morgan on Good Morning Britain, which hosted Seibt live on
their program last week with no mention of her ties to Neo-Nazis and racist
white nationalists. Instead, Morgan apologized to Seibt for slightly
misrepresenting the particular aspects of climate science that she denies,
which Heartland has used to continue[
promoting](https://web.archive.org/save/https://go.pardot.com/webmail/548162/499388500/b9ca7303c1bd2b05e6a8abee53b404d1693f9b521dc51ecdf6441d04cb58ea27)
Seibt.

In the era of Putin and Trump, of Cambridge Analytica and Facebook, of
Charleston, South Carolina and Charlottesville, Virginia, we have no more
excuses to misunderstand this dynamic. Enough false equivalence has been[
published](https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-8040469/German-teenage-
climate-change-denier-Naomi-Seibt-19-known-anti-Greta-speak-CPAC.html).

It’s time for reporters and editors to carefully include evidence of Seibt’s
ties to Neo-Nazis when reporting, or not report on her at all.

_Greenpeace USA’s Valentina Stackl assisted with editing and German
translation for this article._

