Bankrolling
Bitcoin
Pollution:

How Big Finance
Supports a New
Climate Threat

GREENPEACE USA   /   BANKROLLING BITCOIN POLLUTION  1

Bitcoin Big Horn Data Center in Hardin, Montana
© Jane Osborne / Greenpeace

Greenpeace is an independent campaigning
organization that uses peaceful protest and
creative communication to expose global
environmental problems and to promote
solutions that are essential to a green and
peaceful future.

Bankrolling Bitcoin Pollution: How Big Finance
Supports a New Climate Threat
Published March 2024 by Greenpeace USA*

1300 I Street NW, Suite 1100 East
Washington, DC 20005
Tel: 202.462.1177 greenpeace.org

Authors: Erik Kojola and Johanna Fornberg

Contributors: Profundo, WattTime, Burness, Tim
Donaghy, Nathaniel Green, Tim Aubry

Greenpeace USA is also grateful for the review
and contributions of others not listed here,
including members of the Change the Code, Not
the Climate coalition.

*Greenpeace Inc. is a registered Internal Revenue
Service 501(c)(4) nonprofit entity that operates in
the United States of America.

GREENPEACE USA   /   BANKROLLING BITCOIN POLLUTION  2

Electrical lines near Bitcoin Mines in Texas
© Aaron M. Sprecher / Greenpeace

Contents

Introduction

Bitcoin’s Climate and Transparency Problems

Estimating Bitcoin Carbon Emissions and Investments

Financing Bitcoin’s Climate Damage

Polluting Bitcoin Mining Companies

Recommendations to Clean-up Bitcoin

Appendix 1: Methods and Data

Appendix 2: Additional Figures, Data, and Estimates

4

6

11

14

22

27

33

38

GREENPEACE USA   /   BANKROLLING BITCOIN POLLUTION  3

Coalition against Cryptomining Protest in Texas
© Brittany Hallberg / Greenpeace

Introduction

The early days of mining Bitcoin at home on your laptop are long gone.
Bitcoin mining has grown into a large commercial industry dominated by
publicly traded companies that operate large-scale mining facilities, often
using as much electricity as a small city. In 2023, Bitcoin mining globally
consumed an estimated 121 TWh of electricity, similar to the entire gold
mining industry or a mid-sized industrial country like Poland, which is
primarily generated by fossil fuels.1 Bitcoin mining companies rely on
access to capital markets to build new digital mining facilities—essentially
large data centers, and purchase specialized computer equipment which use
all of that electricity and cause a large amount of carbon emissions, while
creating a lifeline for fossil fuels. Yet, there’s been little scrutiny of how
investments from traditional finance companies are enabling Bitcoin mining
companies’ carbon-intensive operations. Banks, asset managers, insurers,
venture capital firms, and others need to be held accountable for their
support of polluting Bitcoin mining and must start taking responsibility for
enabling this growing climate threat that is out-of-step with corporate climate
goals and net zero pathways.

The growth of Bitcoin, and its Proof-of-Work (PoW) system that uses digital
“mining” to validate transactions and secure data, relies on financial support
from large banks and asset managers.2 Despite the guise of Bitcoin being
independent from the mainstream financial system, the industry is deeply
connected to traditional finance for Bitcoin mining companies to access
capital and to enable trading and investing in Bitcoin. For example,
BlackRock, the world’s largest asset manager, was the third largest investor in
Bitcoin mining companies in 2022 and recently launched an investment fund,
called an Exchange Traded Product (ETP), tied to the price of Bitcoin that has
garnered billions of dollars and led to a spike in the price of Bitcoin.3

1 Cambridge Centre for Alternative Finance at the Judge Business School, University of Cambridge.
“Greenhouse Gas Emissions Comparisons - Country Comparisons.” The Cambridge Bitcoin Electricity
Consumption Index (CBECI). https://ccaf.io/cbeci/ghg/comparisons; “Cambridge” in subsequent footnotes

2 For a more detailed explanation of Proof-of-Work consensus mechanism and Bitcoin mining, see:
https://cleanupbitcoin.com/resources; DeRoche, Mandy, Jeremy Fisher, Nick Thorpe and Megan
Wachspress.September 2022. The Energy Bomb: How Proof-of-Work Cryptocurrency Mining Worsens the
Climate Crisis and Harms Communities Now. Earthjustice and Sierra Club. https://earthjustice.org/wp-
content/uploads/energy_bomb_bitcoin_white_paper_101322.pdf

3 “Bitcoin Price Surges as BlackRock ETF Hits $1.3 Billion All-Time High.” March 5, 2024. Nasdaq.
https://www.nasdaq.com/articles/bitcoin-price-surges-as-blackrock-etf-hits-%241.3-billion-all-time-high

GREENPEACE USA   /   BANKROLLING BITCOIN POLLUTION  4

However, there is little reporting about how financial companies are
propping up the Bitcoin mining industry and financing their climate polluting
operations. The Bitcoin mining industry is also notorious for its lack of
transparency. Thus, we investigated the financial services companies
providing investments and support to Bitcoin mining companies. We also
linked those investments and services to the climate impacts of mining
companies using an innovative approach to estimating their energy use and
carbon emissions. We found that Trinity Capital, Stone Ridge Holdings,
BlackRock, Vanguard, and MassMutual are the top five financiers of
carbon pollution from Bitcoin mining companies, accounting for over 1.7
million metric tons CO2 in 2022—equal to the emissions from over 335,000
American homes using electricity for a year.4

We also provide some of the first independent estimates of company-level
carbon emissions by Bitcoin mines, particularly the emissions generated by
adding demand from large Bitcoin mining facilities to electrical grids. We
find that Bitcoin mining companies Core Scientific, Riot Platforms,
Bitfarms, Hut 8, and Marathon Digital generated the most carbon
emissions in 2022 and the collective emissions caused by their additional
energy demand was equal to the emissions of nearly 850,000 American homes
using electricity for a year.5 All 20 publicly-traded Bitcoin mining
companies contributed as much climate disrupting carbon to the
atmosphere in 2022 as two coal power plants in a year, over 7.8 million
metric tons CO2.6 We assess the consequential emissions associated with
mining companies rather than only their average, location-based emissions,
in order to highlight the true impact of their industrial-scale power demand.
Despite some miners' claimed use of renewable electricity, their impact on
the grid often means fossil fuel plants need to fire up to satisfy demand.

4 GHG equivalencies calculated using U.S. EPA tool: https://www.epa.gov/energy/greenhouse-gas-
equivalencies-calculator#results

5 The top 5 Bitcoin mining companies created 4,294,402 metric tons CO2 in 2022. GHG equivalencies
calculated using U.S. EPA tool: https://www.epa.gov/energy/greenhouse-gas-equivalencies-
calculator#results

6 Total estimated consequential emissions from all 20 Bitcoin mining companies was 7,817,773 metric tons
CO2 in 2022. GHG equivalencies calculated using U.S. EPA tool: https://www.epa.gov/energy/greenhouse-
gas-equivalencies-calculator#results

GREENPEACE USA   /   BANKROLLING BITCOIN POLLUTION  5

Bitcoin’s Climate and Transparency
Problems

According to estimates from the Cambridge Center for Alternative Finance,
the global Bitcoin mining network consumed 95.53 TWh of electricity in 2022
and 121.13 TWh in 2023 which generated 48.41 and 61.38 million metric tons
CO2, respectively.7 That’s as much electricity and greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions as many medium-sized countries or physically mining gold.8 And
with that electricity use comes a country-sized carbon footprint. Researchers
estimate Bitcoin’s climate impact relative to its market value is comparable to
beef production and gasoline from crude oil.9 Bitcoin’s environmental
impacts have also worsened as the industry has grown.10

Bitcoin uses so much electricity because of its Proof-of-Work (PoW)
consensus mechanism. Cryptocurrencies work outside a centralized authority
like a bank or government, and instead operate through a decentralized and
collectively-maintained database, or digital ledger, that stores a record of all
transactions. This requires a way to reach consensus on the validity of
transactions and prevent fraud. Bitcoin uses PoW, unlike many other
cryptocurrencies, which requires participants (known as miners) to put in
computational “work” to demonstrate their credibility and protect the
system’s integrity. The work involves racing to guess the right number to
solve a complex algorithm which requires many specialized computers using
lots of electricity. The winner gets to validate a new set, or “block,” of Bitcoin
transactions and is rewarded with newly “mined” Bitcoins.

7 Cambridge Centre for Alternative Finance at the Judge Business School, University of Cambridge.
Cambridge Bitcoin Electricity Consumption Index. “Total Bitcoin Electricity Consumption, yearly.”
https://ccaf.io/cbnsi/cbeci; Cambridge Centre for Alternative Finance at the Judge Business School,
University of Cambridge. Cambridge Bitcoin Electricity Consumption Index, Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Index. “Total Bitcoin Greenhouse Gas Emissions, yearly.” https://ccaf.io/cbnsi/cbeci/ghg

8Cambridge Centre for Alternative Finance at the Judge Business School, University of Cambridge.
“Greenhouse Gas Emissions Comparisons - Country Comparisons.” The Cambridge Bitcoin Electricity
Consumption Index (CBECI). https://ccaf.io/cbeci/ghg/comparisons.

9 Jones, Benjamin A., Andrew L. Goodkind, and Robert P. Berrens. 2022. “Economic Estimation of Bitcoin
Mining’s Climate Damages Demonstrates Closer Resemblance to Digital Crude than Digital Gold.” Scientific
Reports 12(1):14512. https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-022-18686-8; Goodkind, Andrew L., Benjamin
A. Jones, and Robert P. Berrens. 2020. “Cryptodamages: Monetary Value Estimates of the Air Pollution and
Human Health Impacts of Cryptocurrency Mining.” Energy Research & Social Science
59:101281.https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S2214629619302701; de Vries, Alex. 2021.
“Bitcoin Boom: What Rising Prices Mean for the Network’s Energy Consumption.” Joule 5:509–13.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2542435121000830.

10 Jones, Benjamin A., Andrew L. Goodkind, and Robert P. Berrens. 2022. “Economic Estimation of Bitcoin
Mining’s Climate Damages Demonstrates Closer Resemblance to Digital Crude than Digital Gold.”
Scientific Reports 12(1):14512. https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-022-18686-8.

GREENPEACE USA   /   BANKROLLING BITCOIN POLLUTION  6

Bitcoin Mining in Rockdale, Texas
© Aaron M. Sprecher / Greenpeace

Energy-hungry miners are straining electrical grids across the U.S. and
world, keeping fossil fuel plants running and draining electricity when
more is needed to power electrification of housing, transportation, and
manufacturing to meet global climate targets.11 The U.S. Energy
Information Agency (EIA) estimates that annual electricity use from
cryptocurrency mining—primarily Bitcoin, given its the largest
cryptocurrency and one of a few using PoW—already comprises 0.6% to 2.3%
of U.S. electricity consumption in 2023.12 The large demand from miners can
even drive up electricity prices for regular consumers.13

Yet, even these often-cited figures from academics and government agencies
on the electricity and carbon footprint of Bitcoin are only best guesses.14

11 International Energy Agency. January 2024. “Electricity 2024: Analysis and forecast to 2026.”
https://iea.blob.core.windows.net/assets/6b2fd954-2017-408e-bf08-952fdd62118a/Electricity2024-
Analysisandforecastto2026.pdf; Frazier, Melanie. February 23, 2024. “The rise of crypto mines in the South
raises concerns for the electric grid, rates.” NPR. https://www.npr.org/2024/02/23/1233355167/the-rise-of-
crypto-mines-in-the-south-raises-concerns-for-the-electric-grid-rate; Milman, Oliver. February 18, 2022.
“Bitcoin miners revived a dying coal plant – then CO2 emissions soared.” The Guardian.
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2022/feb/18/bitcoin-miners-revive-fossil-fuel-plant-co2-
emissions-soared
12 Morey, Mark, Glenn McGrath, and Hiroaki Minato. February 1, 2024. Tracking electricity consumption
from U.S. cryptocurrency mining operations.” U.S. Energy Information Administration.
https://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=61364#:~:text=Our%20preliminary%20estimates%20sugg
est%20that,2.3%25%20of%20US.%20 electricity%20 consumption.&
text=This%20additional%20electricity%20use%20has,cost%2C%20reliability%2C%20and%20emissions.

13 Dance, Gabriel. January 3, 2024. “The Real-World Costs of the Digital Race for Bitcoin.” New York Times.
https://www.nytimes.com/2023/04/09/business/bitcoin-mining-electricity-pollution.html

14 Chamanara, Sanaz, S. Arman Ghaffarizadeh, and Kaveh Madani. 2023. “The Environmental Footprint of
Bitcoin Mining Across the Globe: Call for Urgent Action.” Earth’s Future 11(10):e2023EF003871. doi:
10.1029/2023EF003871; Siddik, Md Abu Bakar, Maria Amaya, and Landon T. Marston. 2023. “The Water and

GREENPEACE USA   /   BANKROLLING BITCOIN POLLUTION  7

That’s because there is no reliable data on the industry’s energy use and
subsequent carbon emissions since there is a lack of standardized reporting
and disclosure from Bitcoin mining companies.15 The Bitcoin mining sector
does not follow widely accepted and verified systems for reporting GHG
emissions and other environmental impacts. In fact, the industry vehemently
resisted when U.S. regulators instituted a survey of mining companies about
energy use motivated by concerns about rising electricity demand, grid
stability, and carbon emissions.16 The industry’s lack of disclosure and
transparency enables Bitcoin mining companies to avoid accountability
and obscures the scale of Bitcoin’s climate problem.

Big financial companies have faced pressure to disclose and reduce
investments in polluting industries, particularly fossil fuel extraction and
production. There has been some, although not nearly enough, progress in
holding the financial industry accountable for investments driving the
climate crisis.17 However there has been virtually no scrutiny of how these
banks, asset managers, insurance companies and others are fueling a new
climate threat—Bitcoin mining. Financial companies have been silent about
the emissions enabled by investments in Bitcoin miners despite many
companies reporting on so-called scope 3 emissions linked to investments
and lending for other energy intensive industries.

Carbon Footprint of Cryptocurrencies and Conventional Currencies.” Journal of Cleaner Production
411:137268. doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2023.137268; Wendl, Moritz, My Hanh Doan, and Remmer Sassen. 2023.
“The Environmental Impact of Cryptocurrencies Using Proof of Work and Proof of Stake Consensus
Algorithms: A Systematic Review.” Journal of Environmental Management 326:116530. doi:
10.1016/j.jenvman.2022.116530; Krause, Max. 2018. “Quantification of Energy and Carbon Costs for Mining
Cryptocurrencies.” Nature Sustainability 1. doi: 10.1038/s41893-018-0152-7; de Vries, Alex, Ulrich
Gallersdörfer, Lena Klaaßen, and Christian Stoll. 2022. “Revisiting Bitcoin’s Carbon Footprint.” Joule
6(3):498–502. doi: 10.1016/j.joule.2022.02.005.

15 The emissions from miners using electricity would be scope 2 emissions and are largely not being
reported. Scope 1 are direct emissions which apply to a few mining companies that own and operate power
plants. Those companies do report emissions from their power plants, but don’t clearly specify what
amount of capacity is being used for Bitcoin mining.

16 Kearney, Laila. February 28, 2024. “Crypto miner lawsuit sets back US effort to track booming power
use.” Reuters. https://www.reuters.com/legal/crypto-miner-lawsuit-sets-back-us-effort-track-booming-
power-use-2024-02-28/

17 For examples of reporting and research on financing for fossil fuels, see: “Banking on Climate Chaos.”
May 13, 20204. https://www.bankingonclimatechaos.org/wp-content/uploads/2024/05/BOCC_2024_vF1.pdf;
Rothfeder, Jeffrey, and Christopher Maag. February 2, 2023. “How Wall Street’s fossil-fuel money pipeline
undermines the fight to save the planet.” Fortune. https://fortune.com/longform/wall-street-banks-finance-
fossil-fuel-emissions-oil-companies/

GREENPEACE USA   /   BANKROLLING BITCOIN POLLUTION  8

While some mainstream financial companies have stayed away from crypto
due to financial and regulatory risks, the wall between mainstream finance
and crypto is quickly crumbling.18 And even some companies, like Vanguard,
that don’t provide services to buy, sell, and hold cryptocurrencies, are still
invested in Bitcoin mining companies.19 Investors need to know about their
exposure to risky Bitcoin mining companies that depend on cheap electricity
often generated by fossil fuels and will struggle to adapt to the transition to
renewables and carbon reduction policies as well as disruptions from climate
change-fueled extreme weather.20 Banks and asset managers have a duty to
disclose risks to their shareholders and clients who are currently missing
vital information on the climate risks from Bitcoin. As the Bitcoin industry
grows and becomes more enmeshed in traditional financial markets, it’s past
time for more transparency about its environmental impacts.

There is also a troubling trend of the Bitcoin industry making false and
greenwashing claims regarding Bitcoin's environmental impact. Assertions
about Bitcoin mining’s supposed environmental and social benefits, like

18 Schrager, Allison. January 26, 2024. “Crypto Is Going Mainstream, Which Means It’s Over.” Bloomberg.
https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2024-01-26/bitcoin-etf-crypto-is-going-mainstream-which-
means-it-s-over; Morrow, Allison. March 5, 2024. “Bitcoin surges to new record high as mainstream money
flows into crypto.” CNN. https://www.cnn.com/2024/03/04/business/bitcoin-record-high/index.html

19 Vanguard. March 19, 2024. “Vanguard's perspective on bitcoin ETFs.”
https://investor.vanguard.com/investor-resources-education/news/vanguards-perspective-on-bitcoin-etfs.

20 Pan, David. September 8, 2023. “Texas Bitcoin Miners Are Shuttering Operations While Power Crisis
Intensifies.” Bloomberg. https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2023-09-08/texas-bitcoin-miners-are-
shuttering-operations-as-power-crisis-intensifies

GREENPEACE USA   /   BANKROLLING BITCOIN POLLUTION  9

supporting the renewable energy transition, lack empirical support and fail to
address the actual ways mining generates carbon emissions, strains electrical
grids, and consumes large amounts of water. Taking a playbook from the
tobacco and fossil fuel industry, Bitcoin mining leaders have gone so far as to
publish misleading studies in predatory scientific journals written by industry
representatives in an attempt to paint a green image.21 Such papers are
commonly written by people who work for Bitcoin mining companies or
trade associations with blatant conflicts of interest and are submitted to
journals that are known for poor peer-review processes, or upload work to
online repositories with no peer-review system that are then marketed to the
public as rigorous science. These articles have been written to present
Bitcoin’s energy-intensive mining as good for the environment by
incentivizing renewable and stranded energy use and providing stability to
power grids. However, they fail to acknowledge that these ideas are either
speculative, contested, or false.

Speculative narratives and faulty claims obscure and distract from the
realities of Bitcoin mining’s environmental impacts. The lack of reputable
electricity and emissions reporting also makes it hard for investors,
stakeholders, and regulators to make informed decisions.

Thus, we counter industry claims about boosting renewable energy by
assessing how adding large-scale electricity demand from miners impacts the
energy system, often requiring fossil fuel plants to operate. We estimate the
emissions that could have been avoided without large Bitcoin mining
facilities existing and show how additional load from miners can divert
renewable energy from other users, actually leading to a more carbon-
intensive electrical grid.

21 For example, see: Rudd, Murray A., Lee Bratcher, Simon Collins, David Branscum, Matthew Carson,
Shaun Connell, Elliot David, Magdalena Gronowska, Sebastien Hess, Austin Mitchell, Matt Prusak, Kyle
Schneps, Maxim Serezhin, Scott A. Wolfe, and Dennis Porter. 2023. “Bitcoin and Its Energy,
Environmental, and Social Impacts: An Assessment of Key Research Needs in the Mining Sector.”
Challenges 14(4):47. https://www.mdpi.com/2078-1547/14/4/47; Rudd, Murray, Jones, Matthew, Sechrest,
Daneil, Batten, Daniel, & Porter, Dennis. (2024). An integrated landfill-gas-to-energy and Bitcoin mining
model. In SSRN Electronic Journal. Elsevier BV. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4810964;
Analysis of the journal’s publisher MDPI see: Oviedo-García, M. Ángeles. 2021. “Journal Citation Reports
and the Definition of a Predatory Journal: The Case of the Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute
(MDPI).” Research Evaluation 30(3):405–19. https://academic.oup.com/rev/article/30/3/405/6348133

GREENPEACE USA   /   BANKROLLING BITCOIN POLLUTION  10

March to End Fossil Fuels in New York
© Tim Aubry / Greenpeace

Estimating Bitcoin Carbon Emissions
and Investments

In partnership with financial research experts at nonprofit Profundo and
using electricity grid emissions data and analytical support from nonprofit
WattTime, we developed an innovative approach for estimating the energy
consumption and carbon emissions from Bitcoin mining companies, and
used industry-standard methods to calculate the financed and facilitated
carbon emissions attributed to lending, shareholding, bondholding, and
underwriting for Bitcoin miners from financial services companies.

First, we generated a list of private and public Bitcoin mining companies but
found that only 20 mining companies disclosed enough information about
both their business operations and finances to estimate energy use, carbon
emissions, and financial support from financiers.22

22 Profundo identified financial data for 29 Bitcoin mining companies, but only enough data on operations
to identify the number of Bitcoin mined and make emissions estimates for 20 companies. Throughout the
report, we present findings for those 20 companies only (Appendix 1).

GREENPEACE USA   /   BANKROLLING BITCOIN POLLUTION  11

Then, using companies’ financial filings, news reports, and other documents,
Profundo identified how many Bitcoin each company mined in 2022.23 The 20
companies accounted for 16% of all Bitcoin minted that year. Using the
Cambridge Center for Alternative Finance’s Bitcoin Electricity Consumption
Index, we estimated how much energy was used on average globally to mine
a single bitcoin in 2022.24 That allowed us to create a standard estimate of how
much energy was used by each mining company in 2022 since most
companies reported little to no verifiable data on their actual energy
consumption. The energy use and emissions of the Bitcoin network have
grown since 2022, particularly because this covers a period of low prices for
Bitcoin, so the situation has only gotten worse. To calculate the company’s
carbon emissions, we reviewed company documents for information about
the size (power capacity) and location of their mining facilities to estimate the
emissions generated.

WattTime estimated both the attributional (location-based) and consequential
emissions from Bitcoin mining operations. Attributional emissions reflect the
emissions allocated to a mining company based on the average emissions
factor of the grid where each mining facility was located.25 However, we also
wanted to capture the real-world consequential emissions impact caused by
adding Bitcoin miners to energy grids, which can be assessed using marginal
emissions factors. When a Bitcoin mine adds new load to an electrical grid,
typically fossil fuel plants need to generate more electricity to meet the
additional demand. Thus, the broader impact of new industrial-scale
electricity demand is to increase emissions, even on grids with large amounts
of renewable energy capacity. We accounted for this consequential impact
using marginal emissions factors.

Marginal emissions factors can vary significantly from average emissions
factors, depending on the electricity generation mix and the order in which
different power sources are dispatched to meet demand. In most places,
including the U.S., there is a limited amount of power supplied by renewable
technologies on most major electric grids. When these renewables reach
their maximum capacity, fossil fuel sources such as gas or coal are typically

23Data informing this report is available to the public on GitHub:
https://github.com/greenpeaceusa/bankrolling-bitcoin-pollution/

24 Cambridge Digital Assets Programme (CDAP) at the Cambridge Centre for Alternative Finance. The
Cambridge Bitcoin Electricity Consumption Index (CBECI). https://ccaf.io/cbnsi/cbeci

25 The average emissions rate is a calculation of the average emissions rate of all the electricity generated
on the local grid at a certain time. Average emissions generally are a way to allocate responsibility for
emissions evenly, instead of causally. To estimate the location-based attributional emissions, WattTime
used the method developed by the GHG protocol, available at:
https://ghgprotocol.org/sites/default/files/Scope2_ExecSum_Final.pdf

GREENPEACE USA   /   BANKROLLING BITCOIN POLLUTION  12

used to supply the remaining electricity demand. This means that when
additional power demand is added to a grid, fossil fuel sources make up the
difference beyond what renewable sources can supply, and act as a
“marginal” supply for energy. For example, if the marginal source of
electricity is a coal-fired power plant, the marginal emissions would be
higher than the average emissions, which may include a mix of less
emissions-intensive sources like renewables.26 We found that some Bitcoin
mines reported using clean energy such as hydropower from their energy
providers, however it is important to understand that this also reduces the
amount of renewable electricity available to other grid users, meaning
marginal sources like gas and coal still need to increase generation in
response.

Throughout the report, we primarily report consequential emissions
estimates, but attributional emissions estimates are included in Appendix 2,
as well as a thorough description of how emissions and financing were
estimated.27 The overall results for the largest financed and facilitated
emissions, and company emissions are similar for both approaches even
though the absolute emissions amounts are higher for the consequential
emissions estimates. There are also some small differences in the relative
emissions of miners depending on which approach is used.

Finally, researchers at Profundo used financial databases as well as company
annual reports, financial statements, company registries, and media archive
to identify financiers of Bitcoin mining companies and to detail investments
(shareholdings and bond holdings) and credit (loans and underwriting
services) provided to miners.28 This data was used to calculate the attribution
factors and estimate the financed and facilitated emissions of financial
institutions investing in Bitcoin miners. The value of reported investments
and credit were attributed to company carbon emissions using the
Partnership Carbon Accounting Financials (PCAF) methodology, which is a
standard for GHG accounting among financial institutes.29

26 WattTime and Rocky Mountain Institute. “On the Importance of Marginal Emissions Factors for Policy
Analysis.” https://www.bloomenergy.com/wp-
content/uploads/watttime_the_rocky_mountain_institute.pdf

27 Based on marginal emissions analysis and the average estimate of electricity use from Cambridge, which
is how we primarily present carbon emissions in the report. The Marginal Operating Emissions Rate
(MOER) represents the emissions rate of the electricity generator(s) that are responding to changes in load
on the local grid at a certain time. The MOER includes the effects of renewable curtailment and
import/export between grid regions. The units of MOER are the amount of pollution per unit of energy
(lbs/MWh).

28 See additional details about methodology and data in Appendix 1.

29  PCAF Standards for GHG calculation and reporting include industry-supported methods for accounting
for financed and facilitated emissions, as well as insurance-assisted emissions which we do not explore.

GREENPEACE USA   /   BANKROLLING BITCOIN POLLUTION  13

Financing Bitcoin’s Climate Damage

Our analysis reveals that Trinity Capital, Stone Ridge Holdings, BlackRock,
Vanguard, and MassMutual financed the most carbon emissions from
Bitcoin mining companies in 2022 (Figure 1).30 Trinity Capital, a publicly-
traded venture capital firm, led the way with 473,000 metric tons CO2 from its
$60 million in loans to Hut 8 and Core Scientific—that’s equivalent to
emissions from over 93,000 U.S. homes using electricity for a year.31 Overall,
the identified investments and lending for Bitcoin miners in 2022 financed
and facilitated 4.7 million metric tons CO2 (Figure 1). That’s like the
emissions from over 900,000 U.S. homes consuming electricity for a year,
nearly the number of households in Houston, Texas.32

March to End Fossil Fuels in New York
© Tim Aubry / Greenpeace

Unsurprisingly, several crypto-friendly companies were the biggest
financiers of emissions from Bitcoin miners. Stone Ridge Asset Management
is a leading player in Bitcoin investing and has a subsidiary, New York Digital
Investment Group (NYDIG), that is one of the largest providers of Bitcoin and

30 That ranking is based on consequential emissions estimates, but for attributional location-based
emissions, BlackRock, Vanguard, and MassMutual have more emissions than Stone Ridge, which falls to
5th place.

31 GHG equivalencies calculated using, U.S. EPA. “Greenhouse Gas Equivalencies Calculator.”
https://www.epa.gov/energy/greenhouse-gas-equivalencies-calculator

32 GHG equivalencies calculated using, U.S. EPA. “Greenhouse Gas Equivalencies Calculator.”
https://www.epa.gov/energy/greenhouse-gas-equivalencies-calculator; Houston had 947,632 households in
2022 and 998,195 housing units as of 2020, data from: U.S. Census Bureau. “Profile: Houston city, Texas.”
https://data.census.gov/profile/Houston_city,_Texas?g=160XX00US4835000

GREENPEACE USA   /   BANKROLLING BITCOIN POLLUTION  14

crypto investing services and holds billions of dollars worth of Bitcoin.33 Stone
Ridge was the second largest financier of Bitcoin miner’s emissions, 438,000
metric tons CO2 in 2022, from loans to four mining companies worth $226
million. However, when using an average emissions approach, Stone Ridge
was fifth, behind BlackRock and Vanguard (Appendix 2 Figure A1, Table A1).

We also find that big Wall Street companies are investing in Bitcoin mining
and enabling the industry’s pollution. This reflects how traditional finance is
increasingly entering the cryptocurrency market in search of profits despite
the climate, financial, and regulatory risks. Many household names are
among the companies financing and facilitating the most emissions from

Bitcoin miners including BlackRock, Vanguard, MassMutual, State Street,
Morgan Stanley, and Invesco who collectively financed over 1 million metric
tons CO2 emissions in 2022, about 22% of all the financed and facilitated
emissions identified in our study (Figure 1). BlackRock had the third most
financed emissions, with Vanguard very close behind.34 State Street’s
financed emissions were due to large share and bond holdings in mining
companies while MassMutual issued loans to miners in 2022.

Figure 1. The largest financed (A) and facilitated (B) consequential emissions by financial

institutions based on identified investments and underwriting to Bitcoin mines in 2022.

33 del Castillo, Michael. October 13, 2020. “Stone Ridge Reveals $115 Million Bitcoin Investment As Part Of
Billion-Dollar Spinoff.” Forbes. https://www.forbes.com/sites/michaeldelcastillo/2020/10/13/stone-ridge-
reveals-115-million-bitcoin-investment-as-part-of-billion-dollar-spin-off/?sh=48bd81179850

34 Based on attributional emissions estimates, BlackRock and Vanguard were second and third in financed
emissions, respectively.

GREENPEACE USA   /   BANKROLLING BITCOIN POLLUTION  15

Financial Company

Trinity Capital
Stone Ridge Holdings
BlackRock
Vanguard
MassMutual
Mirae Asset Financial
WhiteHawk Finance
State Street
Van Eck Associates
Armistice Capital
Silvergate Capital
Sabby Management
Regal Funds
Exchange Traded Concepts
Morgan Stanley
Invesco
Geode Capital
Toroso Investments
Bremer Bank
Anchor Labs
Total

Financed
Emissions
(metric tons CO2)
473,000
438,000
285,000
278,000
253,000
152,000
147,000
121,000
117,000
101,000
98,000
98,000
98,000
96,000
88,000
87,000
86,000
83,000
69,000
68,000
3,236,000

Financial Company

B. Riley Financial
Mackie Research Financial
Cantor Fitzgerald
Condor Trading
D.A. Davidson
Macquarie Group
Roth Capital Partners
H.C. Wainwright
Univest Securities
Total

Facilitated
Emissions
(metric tons CO2)
60,000
60,000
57,000
56,000
56,000
56,000
56,000
33,000
3,000
437,000

Table 1. The largest financed and facilitated

consequential emissions by financial

companies with identified investments,

credit, or underwriting in Bitcoin mines. The

top 5 financiers financed and facilitated

about 40% of the total estimated emissions

from this research—over 1.7 million metric
tons CO2.

Top Investors and Creditors in Bitcoin Mining

Many Bitcoin mining companies used equity financing—creating and selling
shares or stock in the company—to access capital to fund acquisitions, build
facilities, and purchase more ASICs, specialized Bitcoin mining computers.35
Mining companies have also used debt financing, namely issuing bonds, to
raise capital. Bonds are similar to a loan in that the company pays
bondholders back over time with a specific rate of interest. Once bonds are
issued, they are split into shares and then bought and sold by investors, much
like stocks. However, miners largely relied on selling stock as we found that
90% of investment financing was through shareholdings and 10% from bond
holdings. The biggest buyers of bonds and stocks are asset managers that
oversee money for company 401(k)s, pension funds, individual wealthy
investors, endowments, and others. Energy-intensive mining companies
like Marathon Digital and Riot Platforms relied on hundreds of millions in
equity and debt financing in 2022 to expand their mining capacity (Figure

35 Blocksbridge Consulting. February 22, 2024. “Equity investment is flooding into mining stocks.” Miner
Weekly. https://blocksbridge.substack.com/p/equity-investment-bitcoin-mining

GREENPEACE USA   /   BANKROLLING BITCOIN POLLUTION  16

2).36 In fact, of the miners receiving financing through investments, Marathon
Digital and Riot Platforms received almost 70% of the financing while the top
4 received over 80% showing that the majority of investments were
concentrated on a few major mining companies (Figure 2).

The largest overall investors in Bitcoin mining
companies were Vanguard and BlackRock, but
other large firms like State Street, Morgan Stanley,
Ameriprise, Invesco, and Goldman Sachs were
also among the largest (Figure 2). We identified
over $670 million dollars invested into the 20
Bitcoin mining companies we investigated. This
means that the savings of everyday people could
be exposed to Bitcoin mining companies through
their retirement and investment accounts with
companies like Vanguard, BlackRock, and State
Street, the so-called “big three” index fund
managers. These companies issue popular
investment vehicles like mutual funds and ETPs
that are used by millions and manage money for
big companies and public pensions.37 In 2022,
those three firms managed about $22 trillion, a
massive amount that was equivalent to more than
half of the value of all shares in S&P 500
companies.38

Creating and selling new shares and bonds relies
on underwriting services typically provided by
investment banks who evaluate the company’s
value and facilitate sales. Companies depend on
these services to access capital markets which has
enabled Bitcoin miners to grow by purchasing new
equipment, acquiring land to build mining
facilities, and funding construction. In total, we
identified $462 million in underwriting for Bitcoin
miners in 2022—no underwriting services were identified from 2012 to 2021.

36 ibid

37 McLaughlin, David and Annie Massa. January 9, 2020. “The Hidden Dangers of the Great Index Fund
Takeover.” Bloomberg. https://www.bloomberg.com/news/features/2020-01-09/the-hidden-dangers-of-the-
great-index-fund-takeover

38 Manjoo, Farhad. May 12, 2022. “What BlackRock, Vanguard and State Street Are Doing to the Economy.”
New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2022/05/12/opinion/vanguard-power-blackrock-state-street.html

GREENPEACE USA   /   BANKROLLING BITCOIN POLLUTION  17

We found that a handful of mid-sized U.S. banks are providing the bulk of
underwriting services, including Cantor Fitzgerald, B. Riley Financial, Mackie
Research Financial, Roth Capital, H.C. Wainwright, and D.A. Davidson
(Figure 3). H.C. Wainwright provided $161 million in underwriting while

Cantor Fitzgerald provided $59 million and B. Riley
and Mackie Financial both provided $44 million.
Underwriting from those six financial services
companies alone facilitated 322,000 metric tons
CO2 (Figure 1, Table 1). Meanwhile, these banks
are earning revenue with little scrutiny for the
environmental and community damages or
disclosures to investors and regulators about the
climate risks.

Many mining companies are also funding their
operations with loans from a core group of lenders
from the U.S. that includes niche crypto-focused
firms and some larger traditional finance
companies. In total, we identified lending of over
$1 billion dollars across Bitcoin mines we
researched. Until very recently, Bitcoin mining
companies were considered very risky for
financial institutions, thus most of the company’s
financing was through private investors and joint
venture capital. Since the Bitcoin mining industry
remains new and small compared to other major
industries like oil and gas or steel, there was
relatively less lending, particularly large,
syndicated loans offered by groups of lenders.

We found that the top five lenders were Silvergate
(the crypto-friendly bank that collapsed in 2023), Stone Ridge, M&T Bank,
H.C. Wainwright, and MassMutual which combined lent miners over $960
million from 2012 to 2022, the large majority of all the identified loans that
year. Stone Ridge was the second largest lender issuing $226 million in loans
to four mining companies, including Greenidge Generation, Iris, and Core
Scientific—some of the most carbon polluting companies in our study. In
total, we identified $1.02 billion in loans granted to Bitcoin miners from 2019
to 2022, in the last four years of data collected from 2012-2022. The total
identified financing in 2022 was $1.02 billion out of the total identified
financing of $1.48 billion. (Figure 3).

GREENPEACE USA   /   BANKROLLING BITCOIN POLLUTION  18

M&T Bank and MassMutual are large publicly-traded companies that don’t
have a reputation for supporting cryptocurrencies, but issued loans to miners
in 2022. MassMutual lent Core Scientific $100 million in 2022 which financed
over 250,000 metric tons CO2.39 M&T lent $174 million to Terawulf which
facilitated 31,800 metric tons CO2 (Appendix 2 Figure A2).40

We also find that only a small group of mining companies are receiving loans
and underwriting services. Marathon Digital Holdings, Core Scientific, Riot
Platforms, TeraWulf, and Greenidge Generation are the top financing
recipients and these five companies received more than 80% of the identified
financing from 2012-2022.

2022, the year our data covers, was also a period of turmoil in the Bitcoin
mining industry as many companies struggled with large amounts of debt,
largely from payments on bonds and interest on loans, and a period of
slumping Bitcoin prices.41 Miners relied on credit and access to capital
markets to weather the turmoil in Bitcoin’s price during what was dubbed the
“crypto winter.”42 Core Scientific, which had the largest mining capacity (or
hashrate) among publicly traded miners, even declared bankruptcy in 2022.43
Thus, lending and investing in Bitcoin miners is financially risky beyond the
climate risks and threat to sustainability and climate goals.

Contradicting Corporate Climate Commitments

Investments, loans, and underwriting to polluting Bitcoin mining companies
is out of step with the carbon reduction targets and sustainability pledges
from financial services companies. In our study, 540 financial institutions
financed or facilitated emissions by enabling Bitcoin mining operations.
Financed emissions and risky loans tied to Bitcoin miners are also largely
going unreported and unacknowledged. Financial services firms are resisting
reporting their financed and facilitated emissions, particularly in the U.S.,
but even companies that do disclose this data have not mentioned the

39 Based on consequential emissions analysis and Cambridge’s best guess electricity use estimates.

40 Terawulf. “An Overview of Terawulf’s Facilities.” https://www.terawulf.com/terawulf-facilities/

41 Mellerud, Jaran.December 23, 2022. “Which Public Bitcoin Miners Owe the Most Money?”
https://hashrateindex.com/blog/which-public-bitcoin-miners-owe-the-most-money/

42 Mark, Julian and Gerrit De Vynck. December 18, 2022. “‘Crypto winter’ has come. And it’s looking more
like an ice age.” Washington Post. https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/2022/12/18/crypto-winter-ftx-
collapse-bitcoin-prices/

43 Sigalos, MacKenzie. December 22, 2022. “Bitcoin miner Core Scientific is filing for Chapter 11 bankruptcy
— but plans to keep mining.” CNBC. https://www.cnbc.com/2022/12/20/bitcoin-miner-core-scientific-filing-
for-bankruptcy-will-keep-mining.html

GREENPEACE USA   /   BANKROLLING BITCOIN POLLUTION  19

Financing Fossil Fuel Power: Big Horn County,
Montana
A dirty coal-fired power plant, the Hardin Generating station in Big
Horn County, Montana, has been kept alive by supplying electricity
to Marathon Digital’s nearby Bitcoin mine. The Hardin coal plant’s
closure was announced in 2017 after years of declining use.
However, in 2021, Marathon started mining next door and the
plant’s output increased 816%.46 Now closure plans appear to be on
hold. During the first three months of 2022, the plant was on pace
to increase output another 45% which meant even more air
pollution than the 304 tons of sulfur dioxide and 245 tons of
nitrogen oxides emitted in 2021.47

Big Wall Street companies are helping fund Marathon’s carbon and
other air pollution emissions that harm public health and
contribute to the climate crisis by investing millions of dollars in
the company. In 2022, Vanguard had $37.5 million worth of shares,
BlackRock had over $33 million in shares and bonds, State Street
had $15.75 million in shares and bonds, Morgan Stanley had over
$10 million in shares, and Ameriprise had $13.4 million in bonds
which collectively financed 62,000 metric tons CO2. That’s despite
BlackRock’s statements about reducing investments in coal.48
Investment bank H.C. Wainwright also provided $161 million in
underwriting—a vital service enabling Marathon to access capital
through the stock market in the first place—which facilitated 33,000
metric tons CO2.

emissions tied to Bitcoin.44 Thus, the climate
risks from investing in Bitcoin mining
companies are not being fully acknowledged.
The business model of miners who rely on
cheap fossil fuel energy could be upended by
policies like carbon taxes or strong renewable
energy portfolio standards. Their operations
are also threatened by extreme weather and
unstable electrical grids.45 This means that
regulators, shareholders, and individual and
institutional investors aren’t being informed
about climate, not to mention financial and
regulatory, risks to make informed decisions
and policy. 464748

BlackRock is purportedly a leader in ESG
investing but was responsible for the 3rd
most carbon emissions from its investments
in Bitcoin miners and had the most among
big Wall Street firms. This contradicts
BlackRock’s sustainability efforts and climate
goals. BlackRock is a signatory to the Net Zero
Asset Managers initiative, which includes
pledging to support net zero emissions by
2050 in line with efforts to limit warming to

Bitcoin Big Horn Data Center in Hardin, Montana
© Janie Osborne / Greenpeace

44 Laidlaw, Jennifer, Giulia Hallqvist, Francesca Jaworska, and Wera von der Osten. January 20, 2023.
“Financed emissions are missing from many firms’ net zero plans.” S&P Global.
https://www.spglobal.com/esg/insights/financed-emissions-are-missing-from-many-firms-net-zero-plans

45 Pan, David. February 6, 2023. “Riot’s Bitcoin Mining Still Crimped by December Storm in Texas.”
Bloomberg. https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2023-02-06/riot-riot-bitcoin-mining-machines-are-
offline-after-texas-winter-storm; Quinton, Davis. June 10, 2022. “How extreme Texas weather impacts the
bitcoin mining industry.” The Block. https://www.theblock.co/post/151012/how-extreme-texas-weather-
impacts-the-bitcoin-mining-industry

46 Lacey, Anthony and Jessica Hernandez. April 5, 2023. “Big air quality problems in Big Sky Country.” Proof
of problems: Bitcoin mining’s pollution toll on U.S. communities. Environmental Working Group.
https://www.ewg.org/research/proof-problems-bitcoin-minings-pollution-toll-us-communities/montana

47 ibid

48 BlackRock. “Sustainability as BlackRock’s New Standard for Investing.”
https://www.blackrock.com/au/individual/blackrock-client-letter

GREENPEACE USA   /   BANKROLLING BITCOIN POLLUTION  20

1.5°C.49 BlackRock also promotes reporting of emissions as a member of the
Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures (TCFD), a widely
accepted approach to climate reporting, and a signatory to the UN’s
Principles for Responsible Investment.50 While BlackRock has voiced support
for corporate climate disclosures, that is something sorely missing in the
Bitcoin mining industry.51

Vanguard’s extensive shareholdings in Bitcoin mining companies financed
the fourth most emissions, which stands in sharp contrast to the company’s
stated skepticism of Bitcoin and cryptocurrencies as well as its climate
goals.52 Vanguard, unlike most Bitcoin miners, does disclose its scope 1, 2,
and some 3 emissions and issues TCFD reports. Yet a glaring gap is that
Vanguard doesn’t have targets to cut scope 3 emissions tied to its billions of
dollars of investments, including in Bitcoin miners. This means that
Vanguard is not addressing the primary way it and other asset managers are
funding the climate crisis.53

In 2021, MassMutual boasted of being the first U.S.-based life insurance
company to create a 2050 net zero goal for its investment portfolio.54 The
company is also a signatory of the UN-supported Principles for Responsible
Investment (PRI), an international global network of asset managers, owners
and service providers working to implement responsible investment
practices. Yet in 2022 the company had the 5th most financed emissions in
Bitcoin mining companies (Figure 1).

49 The Net Zero Asset Managers. “The Net Zero Asset Managers Commitment.”
https://www.netzeroassetmanagers.org/commitment/

50 BlackRock. “BlackRock’s 2030 net zero statement.”
https://www.blackrock.com/corporate/sustainability/2030-net-zero-statement

51 BlackRock. August 2022. “BlackRock supports consistent climate related disclosures; urges global
coordination.” https://www.blackrock.com/corporate/literature/whitepaper/spotlight-blk-supports-
consistent-climate-related-disclosures-issb-august-2022.pdf

52 Vanguard. January 24, 2024. “No bitcoin ETFs at Vanguard? Here's why.”
https://corporate.vanguard.com/content/corporatesite/us/en/corp/articles/no-bitcoin-etfs-at-vanguard-
heres-why.html; Vanguard. “Sustainability at Vanguard.”
https://corporate.vanguard.com/content/corporatesite/us/en/corp/who-we-are/we-care-
about/sustainability.html

53 Alcoba, Natalie. August 2, 2023. “The incredible shrinking climate ambitions of the world's largest asset
managers.” Corporate Knights. https://www.corporateknights.com/category-finance/the-incredible-
shrinking-climate-ambitions-of-the-worlds-largest-asset-managers/

54 Massachusetts Mutual Life Insurance Company. July 12th, 2022. “MassMutual releases inaugural
Sustainability Report.” https://www.massmutual.com/about-us/news-and-press-releases/press-
releases/2022/07/massmutual-releases-inaugural-sustainability-report

GREENPEACE USA   /   BANKROLLING BITCOIN POLLUTION  21

Mirae Asset Financial Group had the 6th most financed emissions and is one
of the largest Korean financial companies and a leader in mutual funds
(Figure 1). Mirae reports on environmental issues through annual

sustainability reports and is a signatory to the UN-PRI
Principles and a supporter of TCFD.55 In 2023 the
company joined the Net Zero Asset Managers Initiative
and has set net zero targets for investments based on
1.5°C pathways. Yet, the company has not addressed
how extensive shareholdings in Bitcoin miners
contradicts these goals and principles.

Even some of the smaller and crypto-friendly financial
companies have at least minimal climate goals and
sustainability reporting. Stone Ridge is late to the game
on sustainability but in 2024 issued its first annual
sustainability report. It included a Task Force for
Climate-Related Financial Disclosures (TCFD) Report
and received a B score on CDP Climate Change
Disclosure which included some scope 3 emissions.56
Trinity Capital however doesn’t have carbon reduction
targets or issue annual sustainability reports.

Unfortunately, that’s indicative of venture capital firms that are behind other
financial sectors in taking climate action.57 Trinity is avoiding scrutiny for the
carbon footprint of its investments and failing to report climate risks to its
shareholders.

Polluting Bitcoin Mining Companies

Our data provides some of the first independent estimates of company-level
electricity use and carbon emissions among Bitcoin miners. We find that Core
Scientific, Riot Platforms, Bitfarms, Hut 8, and Marathon Digital were the top
5 emitters in 2022 based on consequential emissions, combining to cause
nearly 4.3 million metric tons CO2 (Figure 4, Table 2).58 We estimate that

55 Mirae Asset Global Investments. 2023. “Policy on Responsible Investing.”
https://investments.miraeasset.com.hk/docs/responsible-policy.pdf

56 Stoneridge. “2023 Sustainability Report: Moving Mobility Forward.” https://www.stoneridge.com/wp-
content/uploads/2024/04/2023-Stoneridge-Sustainability-Report.pdf

57 Roston, Eric. April 25, 2023. “Venture Capital Has a New Net-Zero Alliance.” Bloomberg.
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2023-04-25/venture-capital-focuses-on-climate-change-with-
new-net-zero-alliance

58 Our estimates of electricity use and carbon emissions estimates might be lower than the actual
operations of mining companies because we are unable to account for hosting services, essentially mining

GREENPEACE USA   /   BANKROLLING BITCOIN POLLUTION  22

placing the additional electricity consumption of all 20 companies on the
electrical grid caused as much carbon emissions as the electricity used by
1.5 million U.S. homes in a year, more than all the houses in Chicago,
Illinois.59 Based on attributional emissions estimates, the top 5 were still Core

Scientific and Riot Platforms but followed by
Marathon Digital, Hut 8 Corp, and CleanSpark
(Appendix 2 Figure A3). While the 20
companies included in our analysis are
amongst the largest mining operations, they
still only represent a fraction of the emissions
from the entire global Bitcoin mining network.
These companies accounted for about 16% of
the Bitcoin minted in 2022, thus the true scale
of Bitcoin’s climate damage is much larger.60

Hut 8, Mawson Infrastructure, Stronghold
Digital Mining, and Core Scientific also had
the most carbon-intensive mining operations
based on consequential carbon emissions
per amount of Bitcoin mined in 2022 (Figure
4).61 Thus, while Core Scientific and Riot
Platforms generated the most carbon
emissions largely due to mining the most
Bitcoin, some companies had relatively more
carbon-intensive operations and greater
emissions per Bitcoin mined. This is likely due
to the location of their mines and the energy-
mix on the grid or fuel sources for mines
connected directly to power plants, like
Stronghold Digital that owns a power plant

Scrubgrass Generating Coal Power Plant in Pennsylvania
© Scott Goldsmith / Greenpeace

on behalf of other companies for a fee. For companies that own power plants, we are only estimating the
emissions due to mining Bitcoin, not the full operation of the plant to generate electricity.

59 Our range of estimates are 4,052,535 to 18,226,925 metric tons CO2 in 2022 using a consequential
emissions approach. GHG equivalencies calculated using, U.S. EPA. “Greenhouse Gas Equivalencies
Calculator.” https://www.epa.gov/energy/greenhouse-gas-equivalencies-calculator; In 2020 Chicago had
1,262,612 housing units, data based on: U.S. Census Bureau. “Profile: Chicago City,
Illinois.”https://data.census.gov/profile/Chicago_city,_Cook_County,_Illinois?g=060XX00US1703114000

60 According to Blockchain.com (https://www.blockchain.com/explorer/charts/total-bitcoins), on Jan 1
2022, there were 18,915,693.75 bitcoins in circulation and by December 31, 2022, there were 19,247,031.25.
That translates into a total of 331,337.5 bitcoins minted in 2022. Our analysis found that all 20 Bitcoin
mining companies earned 54,445 bitcoin in 2022.

61 Using attributional emissions estimates, Hut 8, Marathon Digital, CleanSpark, and Mawson
Infrastructure have the most emissions-intensive operations (Appendix 2 Figure A4).

GREENPEACE USA   /   BANKROLLING BITCOIN POLLUTION  23

burning waste coal.62 Analysis by the Sierra Club finds that air pollution from
Stronghold’s Scrubgrass coal plant led to four premature deaths per year.63
Unlike total carbon emissions, we didn’t see as much variation in the carbon
intensity of miners’ operations.64

Bitcoin mining companies often promote vague claims about using “clean”
energy in an attempt to greenwash their operations. Yet, most of the
companies don’t actually report their energy consumption and carbon
emissions, and don’t follow standardized protocols for disclosing climate and
environmental impacts that are used by many other companies. Thus, we
sought a consistent way to compare the emissions between companies and
estimate the consequential emissions of adding this new load to the grid, not
just the attributional emissions for a mining facility. This approach shows
how miners can hamper grid decarbonization efforts.

Scrubgrass Generating Power Plant in Pennsylvania
© Scott Goldsmith / Greenpeace

62 Wang, Boen. November 7, 2022 “How One Pennsylvania Company is Using Waste Coal to Mine Bitcoin.”
Allegheny Front. https://www.alleghenyfront.org/stronghold-digital-mining-bitcoin-waste-coal-power-
plant-pennsylvania/

63 Sierra Club. 2023. “Out of Control: The Deadly Impact of Coal Plant Pollution.”
https://coal.sierraclub.org/deadly-impact-of-coal-pollution

64 There is more variation in carbon intensity when using attributional location-based emissions since
some companies have a large difference between attributional and consequential emissions.

GREENPEACE USA   /   BANKROLLING BITCOIN POLLUTION  24

Mining Company

Core Scientific
Riot Platforms
Bitfarms
Hut 8 Corp
Marathon Digital
CleanSpark
Iris Energy
HIVE Digital Technology
Greenidge Generation
Stronghold Digital Mining
Argo Blockchain
Bitdeer Technologies
Mawson Infrastructure
Bit Digital
Soluna
DMG Blockchain Solutions
Digihost Technology
Cipher Mining
TeraWulf
Total

Consequential Emissions
(metric tons CO2)
1,577,000
815,000
648,000
633,000
621,000
559,000
454,000
432,000
359,000
339,000
276,000
253,000
219,000
151,000
124,000
111,000
108,000
66,000
62,000
7,818,000

Attributional Emissions
(metric tons CO2)
999,000
510,000
67,000
458,000
492,000
400,000
74,000
136,000
177,000
203,000
178,000
117,000
130,000
97,000
81,000
11,000
65,000
49,000
32,000
4,276,000

Table 2. Consequential and attributional emissions estimated from 20 focal mining
companies, using the “best guess” scenario by CBECI.

Even when Bitcoin miners are connected to energy grids with relatively
large amounts of renewable energy, adding new industrial-scale demand
can increase carbon emissions because gas and coal plants operate more to
meet the additional demand. We find that companies on grids with lots of
regional hydropower, like in British Columbia, Canada, have a large
difference between the estimated consequential and attributional emissions.
For example, we estimate that Bitdeer, who has operations near hydropower
plants in Washington State and Norway, had attributional emissions of 67,000
metric tons CO2 but the consequential emissions—the actual impact across
the entire grid system—were 648,000 metric tons CO2. Bitfarms has a mine in
Farnham, Quebec where the attributional emissions were estimated to be
only 590 metric tons CO2 but the consequential emissions were much larger,
over 85,000 metric tons CO2. The actual real-world emissions caused by
Bitcoin mining are often 10x to 100x greater than the attributional emissions.
Relying on attributional accounting—or worse, market-based accounting—
conveniently allows Bitcoin miners to hide their true carbon pollution
impacts.

Another way Bitcoin miners claim to use renewable energy and have low
carbon emissions is by purchasing Renewable Energy Credits (RECs) and
reporting “market-based” emissions based on RECs and carbon offsets.
However, RECs are notoriously unregulated and often do little or nothing to

GREENPEACE USA   /   BANKROLLING BITCOIN POLLUTION  25

Financing Fossil Fuel Power: Texas
Texas is a hub for Bitcoin mining and since 2021, when China
kicked out Bitcoin miners, around 2,300 MW of Bitcoin mining
facilities have been built in the state.67 Standing out in this Bitcoin
boom is Riot Platforms’ sprawling facility near Rockdale that had
the largest carbon emissions in 2022 among facilities owned by
publicly traded Bitcoin miners. Wall Street firms are also helping
bankroll this pollution. Vanguard, BlackRock, Morgan Stanley,
and State Street have the largest financed emissions in Riot,
accounting for 526,000 metric tons CO2 which is the amount of
carbon emitted from 100,000 U.S. homes using electricity for a
year.68 Riot is also expanding into another, possibly even bigger,
mine in Texas which is facing community resistance. Residents
are worried about the noise pollution, heavy water usage, spiking
electricity prices, and public subsidies.69 Local opposition is part
of a broader movement in Texas and nationally to stop the growth
of Bitcoin mining that is straining the electrical grid and pushing
up electricity prices for ratepayers.70

Coalition against Cryptomining Protest in Texas
© Brittany Hallberg / Greenpeace

cut carbon emissions or spur renewable
energy development.65 Researchers have found
that RECs are actually a major barrier to
meeting carbon reduction targets and keeping
global warming below 2°C.66 When rosy
corporate claims about purchasing RECs are
left aside, we find emissions-intensive
operations that rely on fossil fuel energy.67686970

CleanSpark, for example, touts its
commitment to sustainability and doing
“responsible” Bitcoin mining.71 The company
reports using 94% clean energy in 2022 but
without any detailed information or emissions
estimates following standard GHG accounting
measures. Our analysis paints a very different
picture. We estimate that additional electricity
demand from the companies’ facilities led to
over 500,000 metric tons CO2 emissions in
2022, the 6th most out of the publicly-traded
miners, and enough to offset the emissions
savings from 147 wind turbines.72

65 For examples of critiques of RECs see: Osaka, Shannon and Hailey Haymond. June 21, 2023. “Buying
renewable energy doesn’t mean what you think.” Washington Post.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/climate-environment/2023/06/21/renewable-energy-credits-certificates-
greenwashing/; July 22, 2023. “It’s Not Easy Going Green: There’s a way to ‘fight’ climate change that’s
cheap, popular and completely ineffective.” Reveal. https://revealnews.org/podcast/its-not-easy-going-
green/; Elgin, Ben and Sinduja Rangarajan. October 31, 2022. “What Really Happens When Emissions
Vanish.” Bloomberg. https://www.bloomberg.com/news/features/2022-11-01/intel-p-g-cisco-among-major-
companies-exaggerating-climate-progress

66 Bjørn, Anders, Shannon M. Lloyd, Matthew Brander, and H. Damon Matthews. 2022. “Renewable Energy
Certificates Threaten the Integrity of Corporate Science-Based Targets.” Nature Climate Change 12(6):539–
46. https://www.nature.com/articles/s41558-022-01379-5

67 Ferman, Mitchell. October. 3, 2022. “Cryptocurrency miners line up to come to Texas, and rural counties
are welcoming them.” Texas Tribune. https://www.texastribune.org/2022/10/03/texas-cryptocurrency-
mining-bitcoin/

68 GHG equivalencies calculated using, U.S. EPA. “Greenhouse Gas Equivalencies Calculator.”
https://www.epa.gov/energy/greenhouse-gas-equivalencies-calculator

69 Singh, Gigi. October 27, 2023. “Texan Activists To Bitcoin Miners: Don’t Mess with Texas’ Water and
Electricity.” Greenpeace USA. https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/news/texan-activists-to-bitcoin-miners-dont-
mess-with-texas-water-and-electricity/

70 Fernholz, Tim. April 10, 2023. “Bitcoin mining has raised Texas electricity prices 5%.” Quartz.
https://qz.com/bitcoin-mining-has-raised-texas-electricity-prices-5-1850319961

71 CleanSpark. “ESG.” https://investors.cleanspark.com/governance/esg/

72 GHG equivalencies calculated using, U.S. EPA. “Greenhouse Gas Equivalencies Calculator.”
https://www.epa.gov/energy/greenhouse-gas-equivalencies-calculator

GREENPEACE USA   /   BANKROLLING BITCOIN POLLUTION  26

Miners claiming to use renewable energy by simply hooking up to the grid
near renewable sources ignores their broader impacts on emissions.
Connecting large-scale Bitcoin mines to relatively clean grids will not advance
decarbonization and renewable energy development since these facilities
primarily tap into already existing or planned renewable generation. Unless
Bitcoin mining companies are actually paying for new renewable generation
that would not have been built otherwise and generating more electricity
than they consume, they aren’t helping decarbonize the grid. Bitcoin mines
can actually drain renewable energy that is needed for other socially-
necessary uses like heating and cooling houses, especially given the rapid
electrification needed to achieve net zero pathways.73

Recommendations to Clean-up Bitcoin

Cleaning-up Bitcoin is possible. However, it will require major stakeholders
in Bitcoin, like the financial services companies invested in mining
companies, to take responsibility and start working on solutions.
Fundamentally, cryptocurrencies don’t need to use the energy-intensive PoW
consensus mechanism, a system to validate transactions and secure the
network’s data74. Changing how Bitcoin’s underlying system works can
address the root cause of the problem. But currently even assessing the scope
of the problem is difficult due to the lack of accurate and reliable data. This
lets miners and financial companies avoid scrutiny and downplay Bitcoin’s
threat to the climate. Thus, immediate actions are needed to increase
reporting and disclosure from the industry which can inform other regulatory
and technological efforts to slash Bitcoin’s emissions.

Reporting and Disclosure

Transparency is a necessary first step toward understanding the size of
Bitcoin’s environmental problems. Bitcoin miners need to disclose data
about their energy use and carbon emissions, including scope 1-3
emissions, following globally accepted standards including the GHG Protocol
and other environmental reporting protocols like Sustainability Accounting
Standards Board (SASB) standards and International Sustainability Standards

73 Popovich, Nadja and Brad Plumer. April 14, 2023. “How electrification became a major tool for fighting
climate change.” New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2023/04/14/climate/electric-car-
heater-everything.html

74 For more information on the Proof-of-Work consensus mechanism, see: Nevil, S. May 17, 2024. What Is
Proof of Work (PoW) in Blockchain? Investopedia. https://www.investopedia.com/terms/p/proof-work.asp

GREENPEACE USA   /   BANKROLLING BITCOIN POLLUTION  27

Board Standards.75 While some miners report “market-based” emissions
based on accounting tricks to hide emissions like buying RECs, these are not a
replacement for disclosing the actual location-based or consequential
emissions excluding offsets. The GHG Protocol, for example, requires that
companies reporting market-based emissions also disclose location-based
emissions. It's time for the energy-intensive Bitcoin mining industry to come
out of the shadows and follow the broader business community, including
other energy and carbon-intensive industries, on sustainability reporting and
setting scientific and measurable climate targets. Our analysis relied on
estimates and assumptions because there is no verifiable data on electricity
consumption and emissions.

Bitcoin Projection Exposes BlackRock & Chase in New York
© Demian Neufeld / Greenpeace

Disclosure of carbon emissions and electricity use by miners is necessary for
investors to assess climate risks, and for regulators and grid operators to
understand the impact to energy systems, electricity infrastructure, and
carbon reduction targets. Growing energy consumption by Bitcoin mining
could prevent attainment of federal and state-level carbon reduction goals
while straining electrical grids and increasing costs for ratepayers and
taxpayers. Yet, the lack of accurate information from the Bitcoin mining
industry about where facilities are located, where new ones are planned, and

75 The Greenhouse Gas Protocol.2004. “A Corporate Accounting and Reporting Standard: The Revised
Edition.” https://ghgprotocol.org/sites/default/files/standards/ghg-protocol-revised.pdf; The International
Financial Reporting Standards Foundation. “SASB Standards - Overview.” https://sasb.ifrs.org/standards/;
International Financial Reporting Standards Foundation. “International Sustainability Standards Board
Standards - IFRS S2 Climate-related Disclosures.” https://www.ifrs.org/issued-standards/ifrs-sustainability-
standards-navigator/ifrs-s2-climate-related-disclosures.html/content/dam/ifrs/publications/html-
standards-issb/english/2023/issued/issbs2/#about

GREENPEACE USA   /   BANKROLLING BITCOIN POLLUTION  28

how much electricity is used and from what energy sources, makes it hard to
plan and create appropriate policies.

In the U.S., which houses the most Bitcoin mining, the Energy Information
Agency (EIA) needs to conduct regular surveys of Bitcoin mining companies’
energy use and other pertinent details about their operations like facility
locations, energy sources, and equipment. This information is necessary for
tracking the industry’s energy consumption, just like other industries, and
creating standardized and reliable data. The EIA proposed an emergency
survey of Bitcoin miners in January 2024 that was later rescinded in response
to industry backlash and lawsuits.76 The EIA should re-submit that survey to
the Federal Register and open the proposal to the regular public input
process. Further delay will hamper the ability of federal, state, and local
officials to address this rapidly growing but secretive industry. This is vitally
important given that U.S. electricity demand is projected to grow for the first
time in a decade partially due to new load from data centers servicing Bitcoin
mining and AI, with some estimates as much as 20% by 2030.77 Data centers in
the U.S. used more than 4% of total electricity in 2022 but, according to the
International Energy Agency, by 2026 data center electricity demand could
jump to 6% while global demand from the sector doubles, reaching the
amount of electricity used by Japan.78

Financial companies also need to report on the financed and facilitated
emissions associated with their investments, loans, and underwriting
services for Bitcoin mining companies. The impact of these investments can
no longer be invisible, and companies need to align their ties to Bitcoin with
corporate climate commitments and sustainability goals. Individual and
institutional investors need to know if their funds with companies like
Vanguard, BlackRock, and State Street are tied to polluting and risky Bitcoin
mining companies. And shareholders in banks, venture capital firms,
insurers, and other financial services companies also need to be aware of the
climate and financial risks from lending and investing in Bitcoin miners.

76 Kearney, Laila. February 23, 2024. “EIA to temporarily suspend bitcoin miner survey after lawsuit -court
document.” Reuters. https://www.reuters.com/technology/eia-temporarily-suspend-bitcoin-miner-survey-
after-lawsuit-court-document-2024-02-23/

77 Kimball, Spencer. May 5, 2024. “AI could drive a natural gas boom as power companies face surging
electricity demand.” CNBC. https://www.cnbc.com/2024/05/05/ai-could-drive-natural-gas-boom-as-utilities-
face-surging-electric-demand.html

78 International Energy Agency. May 2024. “ Electricity 2024 - Analysis and forecast to 2026.”
https://iea.blob.core.windows.net/assets/18f3ed24-4b26-4c83-a3d2-8a1be51c8cc8/Electricity2024-
Analysisandforecastto2026.pdf

GREENPEACE USA   /   BANKROLLING BITCOIN POLLUTION  29

Banner at Coalition against Cryptomining Town Hall Meeting in Texas
© Brittany Hallberg / Greenpeace

Make Miners Pay Their Fair Share

Ensuring Bitcoin miners pay a fair share for their electricity use, strain on
electrical grids, greenhouse gas and other air pollution emissions, water
consumption, and disruption to nearby communities is also a key step
towards accountability. Policies that make miners pay for the
environmental, social, and economic costs of their operations would also
create pressure to change how Bitcoin operates to eliminate the huge appetite
for energy. Currently, many mining companies benefit from low electricity
rates through fixed-rate contracts with utility companies, various local and
state tax cuts and subsidies, and other programs that prop-up company
profits.79 Yet large Bitcoin mining facilities can drive up electricity prices for
regular ratepayers, jeopardize carbon reduction goals and renewable energy
portfolio standards, and bring hazardous noise, air, and water pollution to
nearby residents. Bitcoin mines, and data centers more broadly, also provide
limited economic development and job creation especially for the rural
communities where mines are often located.80 Research has found that small
increases in local tax revenue from mining facilities are outweighed by
higher energy prices for other companies and households.81 Therefore,

79 Vu, Kevin, and Emily Foxhall. January 3, 2024. “Texan Bitcoin miners profit by using less electricity;
advocates say all Texans should get the same chance.” Texas Tribune.
https://www.texastribune.org/2024/01/03/texas-bitcoin-profit-electricity/

80Samford, Heidi, and Lovely-Frances Domingo. July 10, 2019. “The Political Geography and Environmental
Impacts of Cryptocurrency Mining.” The Henry M. Jackson School of International Studies, University of
Washington. https://jsis.washington.edu/news/the-political-geography-and-environmental-impacts-of-
cryptocurrency-mining/#_ftn37

81 Benetton, Matteo, Giovanni Compiani, and Adair Morse. June 2023. “When Cryptomining Comes to
Town: High Electricity-Use Spillovers to the Local Economy.” National Bureau of Economic Research.
Working Paper 31312. https://www.nber.org/papers/w31312

GREENPEACE USA   /   BANKROLLING BITCOIN POLLUTION  30

reducing and eliminating various subsidies, like tax breaks and reduced
electricity rates, for Bitcoin mining companies is necessary to make sure
public funds aren’t helping to sustain this polluting industry.

One potentially effective policy is placing taxes on the electricity use or
carbon emissions of Bitcoin miners. U.S. President Joe Biden proposed a 30%
excise tax on electricity used by cryptocurrency mining companies in both
his 2024 and 2025 budget.82 The Digital Asset Mining Energy (DAME) tax is an
attempt to make miners pay for the costs imposed on communities and the
environment, and could incentivize miners to clean-up their operations.83
However, the DAME tax has not been included in any current federal
legislation.

Code Change to Eliminate Bitcoin’s Proof-of-Work
Pollution

Changing Bitcoin’s consensus mechanism to eliminate the current form of
energy-guzzling PoW is the ultimate solution to Bitcoin’s climate problem.
Disclosure, taxes, and fees are not long-term solutions, instead we need a
fundamental change in the energy-intensive code that’s driving Bitcoin’s
carbon emissions. A shift away from PoW toward a new, less energy-intensive
system could slash Bitcoin's carbon and environmental footprint. Creating a
new clean blockchain for Bitcoin can make it less risky and future-proof it for
the impacts of climate change and energy transitions.

Bitcoin can, and has, changed, just like other cryptocurrencies. Ethereum,
the second largest cryptocurrency in the word, got rid of its PoW consensus
mechanism and transitioned to Proof of Stake (PoS), which cut its energy use
by 99.95%.84 Bitcoin’s code is regularly being updated and it could be updated
to meet the realities of the climate crisis. However, the social challenges of
making this change are much bigger than the technical demands. Thus, large
and small stakeholders within the Bitcoin community, particularly the
companies funding large-scale mining operations, must champion solutions
that protect the climate and communities.

82 Sparkes, Matthew. March 12, 2024. “US government wants to tax bitcoin to reduce its environmental
impact.” New Scientist. https://www.newscientist.com/article/2421745-us-government-wants-to-tax-bitcoin-
to-reduce-its-environmental-impact/

83 Council of Economic Advisors. May 2, 2023. “The DAME Tax: Making Cryptominers Pay for Costs They
Impose on Others.” U.S. Whitehouse. https://www.whitehouse.gov/cea/written-materials/2023/05/02/cost-
of-cryptomining-dame-tax/

84 de Vries, Alex. 2023. “Cryptocurrencies on the Road to Sustainability: Ethereum Paving the Way for
Bitcoin.” Patterns 4(1). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patter.2022.100633.

GREENPEACE USA   /   BANKROLLING BITCOIN POLLUTION  31

The Bitcoin industry relies on misleading and unsubstantiated claims that
mining can incentivize renewable energy or use stranded energy. Instead of
relying on these speculative and unreliable assertions, the most effective
approach is to modify Bitcoin's underlying code to operate without large
energy requirements altogether. By replacing the energy-intensive PoW
mechanism, Bitcoin stakeholders can start to align with global efforts to
combat climate change by reducing its environmental impact and
demonstrating a commitment to responsible innovation within the
cryptocurrency sector.

Coalition against Cryptomining Town Hall Meeting in Texas
© Brittany Hallberg / Greenpeace

GREENPEACE USA   /   BANKROLLING BITCOIN POLLUTION  32

Appendix 1: Methods and Data

Financial Research

Greenpeace staff collaborated with the independent research organization
Profundo to detail financial relationships between financial institutions and
Bitcoin mining companies, and the emissions that resulted. Research began
with identifying 78 Bitcoin mining companies, which included both public
and private ownership. Of the 78 companies originally scoped, only 29 had
identifiable financial data on investments and credit with financial
institutions. Throughout the report, we only considered the financial data
from the 20 mining companies that had disclosed both financial data and
sufficient information needed to estimate emissions.

We worked with Profundo to collect financial information on mining
companies for the fiscal year 2022, the most recent full year we could get
reliable data on company finances. Because we were interested in estimating
financed and facilitated emissions, Profundo collected data on company
shares and bonds that were issued and held in 2022, and loans and
underwriting provided in 2022. Investor data (shares and bonds) were
collected over two periods: shareholdings were captured for December 2022,
and bond holdings were retrieved for the latest available period due to lack of
historical bond holdings data, in December 2023. Since bond holdings tend to
be long-term, we assumed this would adequately reflect bond holdings for the
2022 fiscal year. Creditor data (loans and underwriting services) were
considered between January 2012 and December 2022 under the assumption
that most financing through loans matures within ten years, and because the
industry of Bitcoin mining is quite young. We only discovered financing
between 2019 and 2022.

Financial databases were used to collect a large amount of financial
information on mining companies, especially Refinitiv and Bloomberg for
investment data (share and bond holdings) and loans. IJGlobal as well as
company annual reports, financial statements, company registries, and
media archives were also employed to detail additional financial information
such as bilateral financing. Generally, syndicated lending was more
consistently reported than bilateral financing, and there may be additional
bilateral lending that was not accounted for in our research. Some
investments were also more opaque, particularly for financial institutions
like insurance companies and pension funds that do not have the same
requirements for publishing investment portfolios or do not offer asset

GREENPEACE USA   /   BANKROLLING BITCOIN POLLUTION  33

management activities. Profundo was able to provide data from their
database of pension fund portfolio disclosures.

Estimating Emissions by Mining Companies

Greenpeace staff collected information about each mining company
identified by Profundo in order to facilitate estimates and research conducted
with WattTime, an independent research nonprofit. Although we were able to
find financial data on 29 mining companies, only 20 also had sufficient
information on mining operations to estimate emissions. We collected
information on the mining facilities that were operating by each mining
company in 2022, including the facility location, mining equipment, hashrate,
power capacity, and details about agreements with energy suppliers such as
energy source and licensed energy allotment. Of the 20 mining companies we
investigated in this report, there were 84 operating facilities. The most
important data for estimating emissions was the amount of Bitcoin mined,
the location of each facility, the power capacity of the facility, and the energy
supply. This information was gathered through public company filings and
occasionally on company websites. This report details the 20 mining
companies for which this data was available to make reasonable emissions
estimates in conjunction with financial information.

WattTime geocoded the location of each facility to approximate spatial
coordinates of each mine. These coordinates were then associated with a
specific grid region, based on WattTime’s grid region data, which provided
location-specific information about available energy sources. For a small
number of mines, we could only confirm location to a province- or state-level
instead of a city. In these cases, a region was manually selected based on
province or state information.

The actual energy usage (in MWh) by a mining facility was also not reported
in company filings. In conjunction with Profundo and WattTime, emission
estimates were informed by the estimated electricity consumption per Bitcoin
and the number of Bitcoin each company reported mining in 2022. The
number of Bitcoin mined per company was split amongst each facility
proportional to the power capacity of each facility. The estimated electricity
consumption per Bitcoin was informed by the Cambridge Bitcoin Electricity
Consumption Index for 2022 (CBECI).85 CBECI estimates include a “best

85 The daily power consumption per bitcoin in 2022 was 288.44 MWh in the “best guess” scenario, with
lower and upper bounds of 149.52 and 672.49 MWh, respectively. Cambridge Centre for Alternative

GREENPEACE USA   /   BANKROLLING BITCOIN POLLUTION  34

guess” scenario as well as upper and lower bounds based on variation in
miner efficiency, energy source, and other factors. Therefore, the annual
electricity consumption by each mining company was informed by the
number of Bitcoin mined by a company, the CBECI estimate for electricity
consumed to mine a Bitcoin, and the relative power capacity of each facility.
We calculated emissions using all three of these scenarios to better inform a
range of possible emissions values (see Appendix 2 Figure A5 for emissions
range estimates).

For some mining facilities, some key information was not available in public
company filings or other official records. When power capacity for a facility
was not available, either the equipment amount and type used for mining or
the facility hashrate were used to inform estimates of energy use and
emissions. We often found that mining companies publicly self-described
their operations as “carbon-free” or using clean or renewable energy did not
provide any specific evidence of this in the company filings. Some companies
did report purchasing RECs and other carbon offsets. We assumed that each
mining facility was operating on the local grid in the absence of any
legitimate evidence of another energy source (e.g. power agreements or deals
with renewable energy suppliers, or evidence of operating clean energy
production facilities). We did not account for purchasing RECs or other
carbon offsetting activities—so-called “market-based emissions”—and instead
calculated location and consequential emissions by mining companies that
exclude any offsets.

Additionally, our methodology and data did not account for companies
hosting mining for third-parties and any Bitcoin that were minted on behalf
of another company. This is primarily a result of lack of reporting by mining
companies about what third-party contracts they maintain, either to provide
or use additional mining services. Thus, we are not able to capture the
electricity and carbon emissions generated from hosting mining services
which for some Bitcoin mining companies can be quite large. Due to the lack
of disclosures about companies using third-parties to host mining capacity,
we are not able to assess the emissions generated by Bitcoin minted at
facilities that are not owned and operated by the company. Thus, emissions
calculations are based on assuming all Bitcoin were mined at the company’s
own facilities.

Finance at the Judge Business School, University of Cambridge. “The Cambridge Bitcoin Electricity
Consumption Index (CBECI) Methodology.” https://ccaf.io/cbnsi/cbeci/methodology

GREENPEACE USA   /   BANKROLLING BITCOIN POLLUTION  35

WattTime determined the mean operating marginal emissions rate86 and
average (location-based) emissions rate87 for 2022 for the grid region where
each mine was located. The consequential emissions were calculated by
multiplying the annual electricity consumption by the marginal operating
emissions rate. The attributional, location-based emissions were calculated
by multiplying the annual electricity consumption by the average emissions
rate. This calculation was done using the best guess, upper bound, and lower
bound scenario for electricity use per Bitcoin mined from CBECI. Emissions
values used for graphs and tables were rounded to the nearest thousand
metric tons CO2.

Assigning Financial and Facilitated Emissions

We consider both financed and facilitated emissions associated with financial
institutions' activities with Bitcoin mining companies. Facilitated emissions
and financed emissions are two distinct ways of accounting for the GHG
emissions tied to financial relationships. Using emissions estimates from
WattTime, Profundo carried out the calculation of financed and facilitated
emissions using the Partnership Carbon Accounting Financials (PCAF)
methodology developed by financial institutions to measure and report
financed emissions.88

The GHG emissions generated by the mining operations that a financial
institution directly lends money to or invests in through loans or share or
bond holdings are referred to as financed emissions.89 These emissions are
directly linked to the financial institution's lending and investment activities
on its balance sheet. Commercial and investment banks are the main entities
providing corporate loans while asset managers own shares and bonds as part
of their investment portfolios.

Facilitated emissions are GHG emissions associated with financial activities
that enable companies to generate emissions.90 These financial activities can
include insurance services, providing access to capital markets by

86 WattTime. “Signal: Marginal CO2.” https://watttime.org/data-science/data-signals/marginal-co2/; Siler-
Evans, Kyle, Inês Lima Azevedo, and M. Granger Morgan. 2012. “Marginal Emissions Factors for the U.S.
Electricity System.” Environmental Science & Technology 46 (9), 4742-4748.
ttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/es300145v
87 WattTime. “Signal: Average CO2.” https://watttime.org/data-science/data-signals/average-co2/
88 PCAF Standards for GHG calculation and reporting include industry-supported methods for accounting
for financed and facilitated emissions, as well as insurance-assisted emissions which we do not explore.
89 PCAF. 2022. The Global GHG Accounting and Reporting - Standard Part A: Financed Emissions. Second
Edition. https://carbonaccountingfinancials.com/files/downloads/PCAF-Global-GHG-Standard.pdf
90PCAF. 2023.The Global GHG Accounting and Reporting - Standard Part B: Facilitated Emissions.
https://carbonaccountingfinancials.com/files/PCAF-PartB-Facilitated-Emissions-Standard-Dec2023.pdf

GREENPEACE USA   /   BANKROLLING BITCOIN POLLUTION  36

underwriting bonds or share offerings, or other financial services that
facilitate a company’s operations (and emissions), without direct lending or
investment.91 Investment banks are the major players in underwriting and
helping companies access capital by selling newly issued shares and bonds.
Underwriters also have deep insights into company operations and finances
since they do research to assess the value of the company and accurately
price shares and bonds. Thus, they should also be aware of the company’s
energy use and emissions.

In the context of Bitcoin mines, financed emissions are the emissions caused
by mines that a financial institution has provided loans to or invested in
through shares and bonds. Facilitated emissions could include emissions
from mines that the financial institution has enabled through financial
support like underwriting an Initial Public Offering (IPO) or issuing a new
bond without directly financing the mining operations through loans or
investments.92 Both financed and facilitated emissions are calculated using
attribution factors that reflect the amount of investments or credit provided
by a financial institution as well as the enterprise value based on market
capitalization or market capitalization plus total borrowings plus minority
interest.93 The latter information was retrieved from the financial database
Refinitiv.

91 ibid
92 PCAF. 2023.The Global GHG Accounting and Reporting - Standard Part B: Facilitated Emissions.
https://carbonaccountingfinancials.com/files/PCAF-PartB-Facilitated-Emissions-Standard-Dec2023.pdf
93 ibid

GREENPEACE USA   /   BANKROLLING BITCOIN POLLUTION  37

Appendix 2: Additional Figures, Data,
and Estimates

Figure A1. The largest financed (A) and facilitated (B) attributional emissions by financial

institutions based on identified investments and lending to Bitcoin mines in 2022.

Financial Company

Trinity Capital
BlackRock
Vanguard
MassMutual
Stone Ridge Holdings
Mirae Asset Financial
WhiteHawk Finance
State Street
Silvergate Capital
Van Eck Associates
Armistice Capital
Sabby Management
Exchange Traded Concepts
Morgan Stanley
Geode Capital Holdings
Toroso Investments
Bremer Bank
Anchor Labs
Invesco
Vident Financial
Total

Financed
Emissions
(metric tons CO2)
337,000
184,000
180,000
160,000
154,000
91,000
88,000
79,000
78,000
68,000
65,000
63,000
56,000
56,000
55,000
48,000
44,000
43,000
34,000
30,000
1,913,000

Financial Company

B. Riley Financial
Mackie Research Financial
Cantor Fitzgerald
Condor Trading
D.A. Davidson
Macquarie Group
Roth Capital Partners
H.C. Wainwright
Univest Securities
Total

Facilitated
Emissions
(metric tons CO2)
37,000
37,000
36,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
35,000
26,000
2,000
278,000

Table A1 The largest financed and

facilitated attributional emissions by

financial companies with identified

investments or credit in Bitcoin mines,

respectively.

GREENPEACE USA   /   BANKROLLING BITCOIN POLLUTION  38

GREENPEACE USA   /   BANKROLLING BITCOIN POLLUTION  39

Figure A2. Comparing the flow of investment dollars (A) and lending and underwriting (B) from financiers into focal Bitcoin mining companies shows variation

in the amount of money each miner received, and the diversity of financial institutions' identified investments and credit to the industry. The thickness of each

flow is proportional to the amount of money invested or credited to a mining company, and the approximate value is shown by the color of each flow in

millions of US dollars. Major banks and firms provided significant financing in 2022, with Marathon Digital and Riot Platforms receiving the largest investments

and Marathon Digital and Core Scientific receiving the most lending and underwriting, while other miners secured smaller but  still substantial funding from

both investors and lenders and underwriters.

GREENPEACE USA   /   BANKROLLING BITCOIN POLLUTION  39
GREENPEACE USA / BANKROLLING BITCOIN POLLUTION  36

Figure A3. (A) Attributional

emissions estimated for focal

Bitcoin mining companies for the

fiscal year 2022. Emissions

calculations were done by

WattTime with support from

Profundo and Greenpeace. (B) The

carbon intensity of mining

operations was estimated as the

attributional emissions per Bitcoin
mined by each miner in 2022.

Figure A4. Consequential and attributional emissions estimated using marginal and average,

location-based emissions rates for focal Bitcoin mining companies for the fiscal year 2022.

Emissions calculations were done by WattTime with support from Profundo and

Greenpeace. Consequential emissions calculated with a marginal emissions rate were

consistently higher than attributional emissions, which used an average emissions rate.

GREENPEACE USA   /   BANKROLLING BITCOIN POLLUTION  40

Figure A5. Consequential emissions estimates were informed by the CBECI approximation

for how much electricity is consumed to mine a single Bitcoin. The CBECI calculation

accounts for a “best guess” scenario, as well as an upper and lower bound. Throughout this

report we focus on the emissions estimates from the best guess scenario, but here we

highlight the range of emissions estimates depending on the upper and lower bound of the

CBECI electricity consumption for mining. Using the upper and lower bounds led to the

following range of possible (A) consequential and (B) emissions estimates for Bitcoin miners.

GREENPEACE USA   /   BANKROLLING BITCOIN POLLUTION  41

GREENPEACE USA   /   BANKROLLING BITCOIN POLLUTION  42

Activists Bring "Skull of Satoshi" to Fidelity's Offices in New York City
© Tracie Williams / Greenpeace

