Carbon Scam:Noel Kempff Climate Action Project and the  Push for Sub-national Forest OffsetsSub-prime carbon brought to you by AEP, BP, and PaciﬁcorpProtecting the world’s forests and climateFor more information,
contact enquiries@int.greenpeace.org

Authors: Ariana Densham, Roman Czebiniak,
Daniel Kessler, Rolf Skar

Designed by: Big Think Studios

Published in October 2009
by Greenpeace International
Ottho Heldringstraat 5,
1066AZ Amsterdam,
The Netherlands
Tel: +31 20 718 2000

Printed on 100% recycled post-consumer waste
with vegetable-based inks

www.greenpeace.org

JN 273

Executive Summary

1

Save the Forests, Save the
Climate
There is widespread agreement that tropical
deforestation, which accounts for about 20% of global
greenhouse gas emissions, must be halted in order
to avoid the catastrophic impacts associated with a
2°C or more rise in global mean temperature. There is
also agreement that efforts to reduce emissions from
deforestation and degradation (REDD) in developing
countries must play a prominent role in United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
negotiations and in domestic climate change initiatives in
countries such as the United States.

The political will to provide ﬁnancial incentives for
developing nations with tropical forests is a positive
trend. But this political momentum is under threat as
heavy polluters attempt to appropriate REDD for their
own purposes, proposing REDD project offsets within
carbon markets as low-cost substitutes for their own
emissions reductions. Among the most controversial
proposals are sub-national REDD offsets, which allow
corporate polluters to continue emitting greenhouse
gases in exchange for protecting an area of forest in a
developing country.

Greenpeace is calling on countries to end deforestation
globally by 2020 and has developed a REDD Fund
proposal called the Tropical Deforestation Emissions
Reductions Mechanism (TDERM) or Forests for Climate.
Our Forests for Climate proposal maps out what world
leaders must do to achieve this goal.  World leaders
must agree at the Copenhagen climate conference in
December 2009 to create a new global fund for forests.
This fund should be based primarily on ﬁnancing raised
through the auctioning of emission allowances in the
amount of $40 billion per year to protect the world’s
remaining tropical forests by 2020.

P
A
C
K
N
e
d
s
t
u
o
t
s
u

i

j

,
l
l
i

m
w
a
s
n
i
t
r
a
M
n
a
S
t
a
g
n
g
g
o
L

i

Sub-national Projects in Reality: Noel Kempff Cli-
mate Action Project, Bolivia

In 1997 three energy giants, American Electric Power
(AEP), BP-Amoco (BP), and Paciﬁcorp entered into
a REDD agreement with the Government of Bolivia.
In return for millions of dollars of investment for the
protection of an area of rainforest from logging for
30 years, they would be allocated the carbon offsets
generated by keeping the trees standing. These offsets
could then be bought and sold in carbon trading
systems, in order to offset some of the CO2 pollution
produced by these power companies.

The project resulting from this agreement is known as
the Noel Kempff Climate Action Project (NKCAP). Since
its establishment, it has become the most highly touted
sub-national REDD project in the world. NKCAP has
been showcased as a model for future subnational REDD
projects and used to promote sub-national forest offset
policies within the international climate talks, to members
of the US Congress, and to other REDD stakeholders.

Authentic Claims or Misaligned Promises?

Given the importance of REDD in the current international
climate change talks and the high proﬁle of NKCAP as
an example of sub-national forest offset project success,
Greenpeace set out to discover whether the claims made
by the project developers could stand up to scrutiny.
Based on extensive analysis of the documentation
relating to NKCAP, as well as interviews with people
associated with and impacted by the project, this report
looks at the project’s promises in relation to actual
emissions reductions, methodologies used to prove
the various elements of successful REDD projects, and
improvement of the livelihoods of the local communities
affected by it.

CARBON SCAM: Noel Kempff Climate Action Project

i

General Findings
This report documents evidence that

(cid:85)(cid:202)

(cid:85)(cid:202)

(cid:85)(cid:202)

contradicts the investors’ claims that NKCAP can
produce scientiﬁcally quantiﬁable carbon emissions
reductions;

questions the methods used to minimise and
quantify leakage (drivers of deforestation moving to
another area);

casts doubt on the project’s additionality (proving
that a speciﬁc forest area would not have remained
standing without offset compensation) and
permanence (where changes to, or losses of,
emissions reduction values occur over time); and

(cid:85)(cid:202)

calls into question the claim that NKCAP has
provided sustainable beneﬁts and alternative
livelihoods to the local communities.

Key Findings

Scientiﬁcally Certain Emissions Reductions

Over the last decade of the project (1997-2009),
the estimated emissions reductions of NKCAP have
plummeted by nearly 90%, from about 55 million to “up
to” 5.8 million metric tonnes of CO2. After twelve years
of operation, a ﬁxed and consistent ﬁgure has not been
established.

Leakage

When providing submissions and comments to the
UNFCCC and the US Congress, the project’s investors
have generally used a project leakage estimate of about
15%.1 However, on inspection of the methods used to
calculate this number, Greenpeace found documentation
estimating and projecting leakage from the project to
be as high as 42-60%,2 and identifying other signiﬁcant
problems such as:

Leakage ﬁgures relating to land conversion are largely
limited to activities that have shifted to a small 15km area
southwest of the project. Leakage to the north, east,
and southeast of the project appears not to have been
monitored or accounted for, even though the impacts to
the atmosphere would be identical to leakage occurring in
the limited areas where it is monitored;

Leakage ﬁgures relating to logging from NKCAP are
based on the predictions generated by a “dynamic
optimisation model of Bolivian timber markets,” rather
than real world monitoring techniques

After 8 years of operations, SGS,a third party auditor
found that existing logging practices were “not conducted
in a good practice style,” “not well controlled,” and lead
to “more damage … and subsequent GHG emissions
than necessary.” In September 2009, the United Nations
suspended SGS, the world’s largest auditor of carbon
offset projects, due to its failure to properly vet projects it
was accrediting.3

Additionality

Greenpeace has discovered evidence indicating that
the NKCAP may not be demonstrably additional. This
undermines the arguments that its additionality can
be proven in a measurable, reportable, and veriﬁable
manner. This is based in part on a new Bolivian forestry
law passed in 1996 — one year before NKCAP was
established — and which changed the economics of
timber harvesting countrywide in such as way that it
reduced the area of land under concession in Bolivia by
about 75%,4 and therefore independently of NKCAP’s
establishment.

Permanence

If AEP, Paciﬁcorp or BP has already used NKCAP to
offset their emissions, in the event of a forest ﬁre or other
damage, the CO2 emissions originally prevented will be
released into the atmosphere. This means that twice
the volume of CO2 may be emitted as a result of the
project. Greenpeace has been unable to ﬁnd evidence of
a carbon reserve or buffer fund beyond a 5% discount
factor used to compensate for CO2 emissions from
possible future ﬁres.

Community Beneﬁts

There appear to be large disparities between the claims
of the project’s investors and the local communities
regarding the beneﬁts of the project to locals. Interviews
reveal that many members of the community were not
informed about elements of the project, and that efforts
to help locals with alternate livelihoods, trainings, and new
skills were in many cases never realised.

These interviews revealed many complaints and
criticisms. One particularly egregious example was
provided by a community member, who revealed that
the programme “APOCOM (later PRODECOM)”, set up
to provide alternative livelihoods to local communities,
amongst other things, “bought a herd of cows for the
community, but they bought the wrong breed — a
European breed that could not survive in this type of
[tropical] environment. They all died in the end. The cows
were so expensive that a whole herd of local breeds
could have been bought for the price of a single one.”

Interviews with community members, park guards, and
personnel at the Noel Kempff Museum conﬁrmed to
Greenpeace that the project has been left unattended
and without a day-to-day manager for over three years,
since the ten-year contract with a local Bolivian NGO for
the NKCAP’s daily administration ended in 2006.

Massive Lobbying by Utilities and the Locking in of
Economic Coal Dependency

In the United States, the coal, oil and gas industries
have spent extraordinarily large sums of money in the
last few years lobbying Congress on issues such as the
introduction of carbon trading and emissions offsetting.
AEP, the primary investor in NKCAP, is one of the most

ii

CARBON SCAM: Noel Kempff Climate Action Project

active electric utilities in these efforts. In 2008, the
company spent over $11 million lobbying Congress,
making it third on the list of the biggest power company
spenders (this being $9.5 million more than the company
spent in 2007).

When broken down by industry, in 2008, the electric
utilities (such as AEP and Paciﬁcorp) rank second out of
all US industries, with over $160 million spent on lobbying
US Congress. The oil and gas sector (which includes BP)
trails only slightly behind, and with spending at over $130
million, comes in fourth place. Incredibly, between 1998-
2009, the electric utilities together spent over $1,161
million lobbying Congress.

A False Solution: Sub-national REDD Offsets

The “award winning” NKCAP highlights and demonstrates
how sub-national REDD offsets are laden with problems,
in particular when attempting to measure the carbon
value of “avoided deforestation.” This is far less precise
than the measurement of emissions from industrial
sources such as smokestacks or tailpipes for which they
are supposed to substitute.

From 1997-2004, AEP, Paciﬁcorp, and BP reported their
carbon offsets from NKCAP to the US Department of
Energy’s 1605b voluntary emissions reductions reporting
program. These total about 7.4 million tonnes of CO2
over an eight year period. We have discovered that this
is far greater than the amount veriﬁed by NKCAP’s third
party auditor for the 30-year lifespan of the project —
5.8 million tonnes of CO2. This means that the NKCAP
investors may have claimed millions of tonnes of CO2
emissions reductions that never occurred.

Had the project’s offsets been intended to be used under
a regulatory, rather than a voluntary market in 1997, the
signiﬁcant shortfall in actual (5.8 million) versus claimed
(55 million) carbon offsets could have resulted in 49 billion
tonnes of additional CO2 having been spewed into the
atmosphere.

Polluting companies such as AEP are using voluntary
sub-national REDD offsets to project a green image,
while creating ways to side-step required pollution
cuts that could result from pending climate initiatives.
If adopted on a large scale, sub-national REDD offsets
threaten to undermine the environmental integrity of
the next international agreement on climate change
as well as any climate legislation eventually adopted
by the US Congress. Concerns are mounting that
aggressive lobbying for large quantities of cheap, carbon
market based offsets will threaten the climate, people,
biodiversity, and conﬁdence in emerging carbon markets.

Put simply, sub-national REDD offsets do not deliver
promised emissions reductions and could perversely
facilitate an increase in global greenhouse gas emissions.
Furthermore, buying carbon offsets from projects such
as Noel Kempff allows giant polluters such as AEP, BP,

and Paciﬁcorp to portray themselves as good actors on
climate change while doing little to reduce the amount of
CO2 they emit into the atmosphere.
Conclusions
Although NKCAP has been hailed as a successful model
for sub-national offset projects, a careful analysis of the
documentation relating to the project, combined with
on-the-ground interviews and research, indicates that
the project has failed to meet its own claims to properly
monitor and account for leakage, ensure additionality,
guarantee its permanence for the foreseeable future,
and provide adequate sustainable development
opportunities for local communities. Despite over $10
million in ﬁnancing and 12 years of operation, the model
for sub-national REDD offsets has yet to produce
real, measurable, reportable, and veriﬁable emission
reductions.

Should the UNFCCC or US Congress allow sub-national
REDD offsets into compliance markets, the result would
be the government-sanctioned use of offsets known to
be of highly questionable value. They likely would not
have provided quantiﬁable emission reductions and may
even result in an overall increase in global greenhouse
gas emissions by allowing major emitters such as AEP to
continue to build polluting coal-ﬁred power stations while
purchasing offsets that cannot be depended upon to
provide real emission reductions.

Requiring national-level emissions reductions through
REDD appears to be an absolute minimal pre-requisite
for the generation of real, measurable, reportable, and
veriﬁable emission reductions. At the last UNFCCC
Conference of Parties (COP 14 in Poznan, Poland),
Brazil, Indonesia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Papua New Guinea (PNG), the European Union, and
others signalled a strong consensus and willingness in
support of national-level emissions reductions through
REDD. Such an approach would go a long way towards
avoiding the problems of leakage, non-additionality, and
impermanence which are associated with subnational
projects.

In order to give the world the best chance to keep
global temperature rise as far below 2°C as possible,
Greenpeace is calling on countries to commit to the goal
of ending deforestation globally by 2020. To achieve
this goal, world leaders must agree at the Copenhagen
climate conference in December 2009 to create a new
global fund for forests with the goal of protecting the
world’s remaining tropical forests by 2020. This fund
should contain ﬁnancing in the amount of $40 billion per
annum, with the vast majority of ﬁnancing coming from
public and market-linked sources, such as through the
auctioning of emission allowances. Given the estimated
costs of climate change, quick and equitable action on
deforestation would save taxpayers signiﬁcant climate-
related costs in the future.

CARBON SCAM: Noel Kempff Climate Action Project

iii

Greenpeace Policy Position on REDD
Greenpeace strongly supports the inclusion of REDD as a key part of any international and domestic climate
change action. A successful REDD mechanism should bring the world closer to — not further away from — the
goal of keeping global temperature rise as far below 2°C as possible. Therefore, an effective REDD mechanism
will not include offset credits in the carbon markets and would have the following characteristics:

(cid:85)(cid:202)

(cid:85)(cid:202)

achieve zero gross deforestation
Paradise Forests of Southeast Asia by 2015, and all other countries with tropical forests by 2020

 in priority areas such as the Amazon, the Congo Basin, and the

national-level reductions in forest emissions to minimise the problems of leakage, non-

require
additionality, and impermanence

(cid:85)(cid:202)

allow for the

broad participation of countries with tropical forests;

(cid:85)(cid:202)

(cid:85)(cid:202)

protect biodiversity
and outcomes

 consistent with international conventions and objectives to avoid perverse incentives

fully respect the rights of indigenous peoples and local communities
participation and free, prior, and informed consent

 and provide forums for full

(cid:85)(cid:202)

ensure that

beneﬁts are equitably shared between countries and stakeholders

(cid:85)(cid:202)

guarantee reliable

independent monitoring and veriﬁcation of activities and results

For more on Greenpeace’s position on REDD visit www.greenpeace.org/forestsforclimate

k
r
a
P
e
t
a
t
S
o
n

i
l

a
t
s
i
r

 C
 —

i

t
s
e
r
o
f
n
a
r
n
a
n
o
z
a
m
A

i

iv

CARBON SCAM: Noel Kempff Climate Action Project

t
c
a
t
n

I

CARBON SCAM: Noel Kempff Climate Action Project

1

2

Report Title: Subhead

2

Noel Kempff Climate
Action Project

Background
Tropical deforestation, which accounts for about 20%
of global greenhouse gas emissions, must be halted
in order to avoid catastrophic impacts associated
with a 2°C rise in global mean temperature. There is
widespread agreement that efforts to Reduce Emissions
from Deforestation and forest Degradation (REDD) in
developing countries must play a prominent role in United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC) negotiations and in domestic climate change
initiatives in countries such as the United States. The
debate is not whether to pursue REDD, but how to fund
and administer it. Instead of funding REDD through
public and market-linked ﬁnancing (such as auction
revenues from emission allowances) that would take us
closer to the overall emission reductions required by the
science, industrial polluters are proposing sub-national
REDD offsets to provide a cheap alternative to required
emissions reductions under a cap and trade programme.

Concerns over the quality of REDD offsets excluded
them from the Kyoto Protocol and barred them from the
European Union Emissions Trading System, the largest
compliance-based carbon market in the world. Measuring
the amount of carbon sequestered as a result of “avoided
deforestation” is much less precise than measuring the
amount of carbon emissions from industrial sources such
as smokestacks or tailpipes that they are supposed to
replace or offset. Also, the inherent problems of leakage
(wherein avoided deforestation in one area results in
deforestation in another), additionality (proving that a
speciﬁc forest area would not have remained standing
without offset compensation), and impermanence
(changes to, or losses of, emissions reduction values
over time) are extraordinarily difﬁcult to address in the
case of REDD offsets. These challenges are particularly
problematic with sub-national REDD offsets which protect
small areas without reference to national-level monitoring
or accounting. REDD offsets that do not deliver promised

emissions reductions due to these factors could
perversely facilitate an increase in global greenhouse gas
emissions.

There is international recognition that national-level
approaches to REDD are better suited to address
problems of leakage and additionality.5 However,
polluting companies such as American Electric Power
(AEP) are using voluntary, sub-national REDD offsets to
project a green image,6 while creating ways to side-step
required pollution cuts that could result from pending
climate initiatives.7 Sub-national REDD offsets threaten
to undermine the environmental integrity of the next
international agreement on climate change as well as
domestic initiatives to control emissions, such as the (the
Senate version of the House American Clean Energy and
Security Act (ACES), (also known as Waxman-Markey)
bill pending in the US Congress. Such a move could also
damage the progress and goodwill that has been built
to date and either, once again, leave forests outside of
an international agreement, or see them included but in
a perverse way. Concerns are mounting that aggressive
lobbying for large quantities of cheap, low-quality REDD
offsets will threaten the climate, people, biodiversity, and
conﬁdence in carbon markets.

The Noel Kempff Climate Action Project (NKCAP) in
Bolivia is the most highly touted sub-national REDD
project in the world.8 NKCAP has been used to promote
sub-national forest offset policies within the international
climate talks, to members of the US Congress, and to
other REDD stakeholders. However, Greenpeace has
discovered evidence that sponsors of the twelve-year-
old model for sub-national REDD offsets have seriously
overestimated its emissions reduction potential, failed
to quantify and prevent leakage, and failed to deliver
promised beneﬁts to affected local communities and
indigenous peoples.

.
e
n
o
z

r
e
f
f
u
b
P
A
C
K
N
e
h
t
e
d
s
t
u
o
t
s
u

i

j

s
n
o
i
t
a
r
e
p
o
g
n
g
g
o
L

i

CARBON SCAM: Noel Kempff Climate Action Project

3

“[W]e have a project here that was developed
with great care, a project that we believe can
withstand the scrutiny of the world and will be
viewed as a very cost effective, but legitimate as
well, response to the climate change issue.”

(American Electric Power, testimony to US Congress (2001))9

Entrance to Noel Kempff Park

The Noel Kempff
Climate Action Project History
In 1997, three power companies, a US NGO called The
Nature Conservancy (TNC), and the Bolivian government
made a deal to protect an area of tropical rainforest in
northeast Bolivia — NKCAP. Financing was used to buy
out pre-existing logging concessions in an area near a
national park (the Noel Kempff Mercado National Park,
designated as a UNESCO World Heritage site) and create
a protected area twice its original size.10 Project sponsors
planned to generate carbon offsets to be sold on the
Chicago Climate Exchange (CCX) and to offset their CO2
emissions.11

The Players

AEP invested $6.2 million into NKCAP (53% of the total
investment), Paciﬁcorp invested $1.75 million (16%
total investment), BP invested $0.8 million (7% total
investment), and TNC invested $2.6 million (24% total
investment).12 The rights to the carbon offsets were
split 49% to the Government of Bolivia and 51% to the
investors. More speciﬁc allocation details are below.13

Breakdown of the rights to Noel Kempff’s carbon offsets:

“According to the [project] agreement the parties
would receive Certiﬁed Offsets as follows:

(cid:85)(cid:202)

Apportionment to AEP. The equivalent
of 2% of offsets accumulated each year
during the project term. AEP shall receive
this apportionment as consideration for its
leadership, ﬁnancial support in developing the
project and for marketing the project to other
prospective ﬁnancial participants.

4

CARBON SCAM: Noel Kempff Climate Action Project

Problem: Systemic Lobbying
by AEP, BP, and Paciﬁcorp
The last few years have witnessed heavy and
sustained lobbying for the introduction of carbon
trading and emissions offsetting, like that now seen
in the US ACES legislation. This lobbying activity
has successfully made the concept of “cap and
trade” very favourable to industry, in particular to
allow it to continue emitting at “business as usual”
levels (by “offsetting” their emissions with forest
projects, etc.). Additionally, this lobbying has also
brought around a strengthened proﬁt making
environment.

American Electric Power has the dubious
distinction of coming in third place in the list of
energy companies having spent money lobbying
the US Congress, with over $11 million spent in
2008 (this is $9.5 million more than they spent
in 2007).14 In the same year, they paid $350,000
and $580,000 to retain the lobbying services of
Washington law ﬁrms Van Ness Feldman and Sidley
Austin respectively.15 These ﬁrms are foremost in
leading the development of climate change and
carbon trading laws. Notably, Sidley Austin advises
corporations on issues such as the creation of
hedge funds which involve carbon offsets traded on
the CCX, and the voluntary reporting of greenhouse
gas emissions on the US Department of Energy’s
1605b programme.16 Van Ness Feldman specialises
in advice on emissions trading, carbon markets and
offset project development like those similar to Noel
Kempff.17

BP stepped up its lobbying efforts in 2009. Having
not featured on the list of the 20 biggest spenders
since 1998, already at time of writing (Sept 2009)
the company has spent over $7.5 million on
lobbying US Congress and federal agencies, and it
ranks as the 15th biggest spender.18

AEP and Paciﬁcorp are members of the coal utility
trade association, the Edison Electric Institute
(EEI).19 The EEI has frequently been one of the
biggest spenders on lobbying US Congress over
the last 10 years, spending a massive $128 million
between 1998-2009.20

It is illuminating to see that when broken down by
industry, in 2008, the electric utilities come in at
second place out of all US industries (over $160
million) spent on lobbying US Congress. The oil and
gas sector is not far behind at 4th place spending
over $130 million.21 Between 1998-2009, the
electric utilities have spent over $1,161 million (that’s
over a thousand million dollars) on lobbying alone.22

THE INVESTORS
Corporate Proﬁles and Environmental Records 23
American Electric Power (AEP)

American Electric Power (AEP) is a major investor-
owned electric utility operating in the United States.
Based in Columbus, Ohio it serves 5.2 million
customers in 11 states.24 AEP is tough to beat when
it comes to dirty energy. The company burns more
coal than any other electric utility in the Western
hemisphere and emits more CO2 than any other
power company in the United States. As a result of a
landmark 2007 lawsuit ﬁled by the Justice Department
for repeated violations of the Clean Air Act, the
company agreed to install $4.6 billion in equipment to
reduce pollution at some of its coal-ﬁred power plants:
this was the largest environmental settlement in Justice
Department history.25 AEP is also the proud owner of
eleven “high hazard”26 coal ash dumps.27

On its website, AEP claims that from 2010 onwards,
the company will voluntarily “reduce” or “offset” 5
million tonnes of CO2 per year through such measures
as investing in forest projects at home and abroad,
improving power plant efﬁciency and added renewable
energy projects to it generation portfolio.28 Despite this,
the company’s CO2 emissions are set to increase from
175 million tonnes per year to 192 million tonnes in ten
years’ time.29

AEP is the single largest energy contributor to both
Republican and Democratic candidates for Congress
and has spent more money than any other power
company lobbying members of Congress.30 In 2008,
AEP paid out more than $12 million for Washington
lobbyists.31

BP-Amoco

BP-Amoco is a British petrochemical company
headquartered in Westminster, London. It is the largest
UK company, the ﬁfth largest globally, and has active
operations in 29 countries.32 BP has 19 oil reﬁneries
which process 1.5 million barrels of crude oil every day.33
The company’s UK arm operates 45 oil ﬁelds and 33 oil
platforms alone.34 In global terms, BP-Amoco is ranked
as 351st biggest emitter of CO2 in the world,35 and in
2008, the company’s operations released over 66 million
tonnes of CO2 into the earth’s atmosphere, roughly
equivalent to the emissions of Portugal.36 This ﬁgure
would be substantially higher if carbon emissions from
the use of oil products were taken into account.

In 2000, BP rebranded itself and adopted the tagline
“Beyond Petroleum.”37 In 2000 and 2005, BP was
named as one of the “10 worst corporations” for its
environmental and human rights record.38 In 2009,
it was a nominee for the 2009 Greenwash Awards
for deliberately exaggerating its environmental
credentials.39

Far from being “Beyond Petroleum”, BP’s documents
show that in 2008, the company allocated about $20

billion of its total investment fund for the exploration,
production and reﬁning of oil and other fossil fuels.40 By
contrast, investment in all alternative forms of energy
amounted to $1.5 billion.41

BP America has actively lobbied for the introduction
of carbon trading. It is a member of the US Climate
Action Partnership which supports the ACES bill and
a national compliance-based carbon trading system.
Strangely, BP is also a member of the American
Petroleum Institute (API) which has been lobbying
heavily against substantive carbon reduction measures
in the ACES bill. In 2008, BP, a lobbying “heavy
hitter”42 spent almost $10.5 million,43 and in the same
year spent almost $5 million on lobbying US Congress,
by virtue of its membership in API. 44

Paciﬁcorp

Paciﬁcorp, an electric utility serving industrial,
commercial and residential customers in the western
United States, is a wholly owned subsidiary of
MidAmerican Energy Holdings Company. Berkshire
Hathaway owns MidAmerican Energy Holdings, which
purchased Paciﬁcorp from Scottish Power in 2006
for $9.4 billion.45 MidAmerican also owns CalEnergy
Generation, HomeServices of America, Kern River Gas
Transmission Company, CE Electric UK, and Northern
Natural Gas Company.46

Paciﬁcorp is the most polluting of MidAmerican Energy
Holdings companies, responsible for 53,900,000 tonnes
of CO2 out of a total of 76,400,000.47 In global terms, it
ranks as the 35th biggest polluter of CO2 in the world.48
The vast majority of Paciﬁcorp energy — 87% — comes
from fossil fuels (70% coal, 17% natural gas).49 Wind
and other renewables constitute only 3%, with large
hydroelectric dams providing the remaining 10%.50 It
operates surface and underground coal mines near some
of its larger coal ﬁred power plants, including the Jim
Bridger, Huntington & Hunter and Craig mines (140, 45
and 47 millions of recoverable tonnes, respectively).51

The Jim Bridger plant is currently one of the top
twenty most polluting coal plants in the United States,
emitting 16,000,000 tonnes of CO2 a year.52 In addition
to being sued for repeated permit violations by
community groups,53 Paciﬁcorp was ﬁned $10.5 million
in 2009 for illegally killing eagles and other birds with
outdated transmission lines.54

During the 2008 US election cycle, Paciﬁcorp/
MidAmerican Political Action Committee contributed
to Republicans and Democrats at nearly a two to
one ratio ($39,800 to $22,000).55 It also contributed
to CoalPAC which lobbies aggressively for the coal
industry.56 Despite a claim to be “committed to an
aggressive series of benchmarks in adding renewable
projects to its generating capacity,”57 Paciﬁcorp is
projected to increase its CO2 emissions by 10,000,000
tonnes over the next 10 years.58

CARBON SCAM: Noel Kempff Climate Action Project

5

(cid:85)(cid:202)

(cid:85)(cid:202)

Apportionment to the Industry Participants. To
industry participants, AEP, BP, Paciﬁcorp, (on a
pro rata basis in proportion to their respective
ﬁnancial contributions to the project) the
equivalent to 49% of the offsets accumulated
each year during the project term.

Apportionment to Fundación Amigos de la
Naturaleza [see below] and the Government of
Bolivia. The equivalent of 20% of the offsets
accumulated each year during the project term.
Funds obtained through the sale of these offsets
shall be contributed to an Endowment Account
for the National System of Protected Areas.

(cid:85)(cid:202)

Apportionment to the Government of
Bolivia. The equivalent of 29% of the offsets
accumulated each year during the project term.
Funds obtained through the sale of these offsets
are to be invested in Bolivia…”59

TNC secured the ﬁnancing, managed, and administered
the project in cooperation with Fundación Amigos de
la Naturaleza (FAN), a local NGO in Bolivia. Winrock
International Institute for Agricultural Development was
the lead carbon measurement partner for NKCAP, and
Société Générale de Surveillance (SGS), a British owned
validation and certiﬁcation ﬁrm, was brought in as an
independent third party to certify the carbon offsets from
the project.60

The Purpose

AEP, BP, and Paciﬁcorp are large polluters interested in
carbon offsets that would allow them to avoid reducing

their own emissions. Buying carbon offsets from projects
such as Noel Kempff allows these companies to portray
themselves as good actors on climate change while
doing little to reduce the amount of CO2 they emit into
the atmosphere. This is called greenwashing. In the face
of a carbon constrained energy future, power companies
are pursuing all sorts of creative accounting measures
(i.e., carbon intensity targets) to make it look like they are
tackling climate change when the reality is that the only
thing that will cut their CO2 emissions is burning less fossil
fuel.

These companies may also have been motivated by
making proﬁts from offsets.61 While NKCAP has produced
offsets intended for sale in voluntary carbon markets, it
is likely that the investors will seek to have such offsets
approved by governments for sale on regulatory markets
(e.g. as credit for early action), where they would yield
signiﬁcantly greater proﬁts.62

The Plaudits

Since its establishment twelve years ago, NKCAP has
been the ﬂagship sub-national REDD project. The
Project’s partners have extolled the project’s successes
in submissions to the US Congress and the UNFCCC.63
NKCAP has also been cited in studies such as the Eliasch
Review64 and in U.K. House of Commons Environmental
Audit Committee hearings.65

Noel Kempff also became part of the US Initiative on Joint
Implementation (USIJI)66 and Activities Implemented Jointly
(AIJ)67 programmes, and was hailed as conforming to the
Clean Development Mechanism criteria even though it

Table 1. The NKCAP partners claims of the Project’s CO2 savings over a ten-year timeframe

Date

Statement by Project Investors on the Ability to
Accurately Assess NKCAP Emission Reductions

1999

“The carbon sequestered by the project has been estimated using scientiﬁcally
rigorous methodology developed by Winrock… The project and its monitoring and
veriﬁcation protocol is viewed as an important model in demonstrating scientiﬁcally
valid carbon measurements.”

– Statement of Tia Nelson, Deputy Director, Climate Change Program, The Nature
Conservancy; Before the Senate Committee on Environment and Public Works,
United States Senate (March 24, 1999) available at <http://epw.senate.gov/107th/
nel_3-24.htm>

2001

“We believe we have proven with this project that avoided deforestation is a
legitimate and veriﬁable climate change mitigation option . . . .”

– Dale E. Heydlauff, Senior Vice President for Environmental Affairs, American
Electric Power Company, Hearing before the Subcommittee on Science, Technology
and Space on Carbon Sequestration: Measurements and Beneﬁts (May 23, 2001),
p.7

NKCAP Emissions Reduction
Figures over project life
(reduce, avoid or mitigate)

(Carbon: CO2 ratio taken as
1:3.67)

15 million tonnes of carbon
(equals 55 million metric tonnes
of CO2)

7 million tonnes of carbon
(equals 25.6 million metric tonnes
of CO2)

2008-
2009

“The technology currently exists to effectively measure and monitor the emissions
reduced by preventing deforestation and degradation… large-scaleavoided
deforestation projects can produce real and measurable carbon offsets.”

“Up to” 1.6 million tonnes carbon
(equals “up to” 5.8 million tonnes
of CO2)

– The Nature Conservancy: REDD is the New Green (15 October 2008), available at
<http://conexmeeting.org/ht/a/GetDocumentAction/i/1927>

6

CARBON SCAM: Noel Kempff Climate Action Project

was not an eligible activity.68 In addition, the project was
recognised by Harvard University as a global model for its
approach to climate change. In 2003, the NKCAP partners
received the Roy Family Award, presented bi-annually at
Harvard University to a public-private partnership project
that enhances environmental quality through the use of
novel and creative approaches, as a result.69

The Reality

Greenpeace launched an investigation to examine the
veracity of the claims associated with the Noel Kempff
project as a suitable prototype for future sub-national
REDD projects. Speciﬁcally, we examined the ability of
the project to deliver on claims to quantify and reduce
carbon emissions, and bring sustainable beneﬁts to local
communities. Our investigation has found that NKCAP
has systematically failed to demonstrate it has delivered
on these objectives.
1. Are Emission Reductions from
NKCAP Accurately Reported?
“Experts have determined through a series of
technical workshops and projects that GHG
beneﬁts can be accurately quantiﬁed.”

(American Electric Power, testimony to US Congress, (2000))70

“It is not an easy task to ﬁgure out what the
exact methodologies are and how carbon
beneﬁts have been calculated.”

(SGS, Third Party Veriﬁer of NKCAP (2005))71

The immediate question when considering the objective
performance of sub-national REDD projects is: are
the emissions reductions provided by the projects
real, additional, and permanent?72 This imperative is
heightened if the emissions reductions from the project
are intended to offset continued industrial emissions.
In such instances, the crediting of an offset that is not
real allows emissions to be emitted into the atmosphere
elsewhere, and could lead to the perverse situation in
which global greenhouse gas emissions increase overall.

NKCAP’s investors and stakeholders have stated
from the beginning that they can accurately quantify
the emissions reductions the project will achieve
over its 30-year lifespan.73 Yet, over the last decade
of the project (1997-2009), the estimated emissions
reductions of NKCAP have plummeted by more than
90%, from about 55 million to 5.8 million metric tonnes
of CO2 (or less).74 The 1999 AIJ Report for Noel Kempff
established that the project’s lifetime CO2 beneﬁts
would total about 55 million tonnes.75 Yet just six
years later, in 2005, SGS determined that to date, the
project had provided only about 1 million tonnes, and
estimated that it would result in about 6 million tonnes
over its lifetime (10% of the initial promise of about 55
million).76 In 2007, the numbers were revised yet again,
with the Project’s carbon beneﬁts being estimated as
any amount “up to” 5.8 million tonnes of CO2 over its

lifetime.77 After twelve years, a consistent ﬁgure is yet to
be established.

NKCAP’s partners defend these ﬁgures as based on the
best available data at the time, and given that the science
of monitoring and measuring CO2 has improved over the
years, assert that the emissions avoidance ﬁgures were
scaled down appropriately. However, such assertions fall
ﬂat when accompanied by claims about the accuracy and
scientiﬁc certainty of carbon accounting methodologies
subsequently shown to be inaccurate. Indeed, the
information in this report seriously calls into question the
veracity of claims currently being made about the project.

First Step: Establishing a Legitimate Baseline

In order to know whether emissions have been reduced,
a baseline is needed against which future emissions will
be measured. In the context of a national approach, this
is a relatively straightforward exercise, with a historical
baseline established on a ﬁve, ten, or twenty-year
horizon, based on deforestation rate information that has
been collected on countries since 1990.79 With sub-
national projects like NKCAP, however, the establishment
of a baseline is a much more tenuous process. Since
there are no obvious geo-political boundaries to use as
a basis, there is a risk that the baselines will be arbitrary,
inaccurate, or even manipulated to maximise claimed
carbon offsets (see Chart .1 below).

Map 1. The Noel Kempff Climate Action Project area
which highlights the park, project area, buffer zone, and
reference area78

Buffer zone
(15km buffer
zone around
NK-CAP

Project Area
NK-CAP

National Park
NKMNP

Reference Area

CARBON SCAM: Noel Kempff Climate Action Project

7

The NKCAP baseline was determined by combining
historical data (satellite imagery) from three points in time
prior to the start of the project with a simulation model’s
future projection of deforestation in the project area (not
including the park), buffer zone, and a “reference area”
(see Map. 1 above).80 The project design documents
argue that this process “creates a reasonable baseline
scenario” against which deforestation is measured.81
Little information is provided on the reasons behind the
identiﬁcation and selection of the reference area.82

Chart 1. The potential for bogus emission reductions

2

m
k

a
e
r
A

“Hot Air”

Year

Established
Baseline

Actual
Baseline

Non-additional
(“fake”) emission
reduction credits

Baselines for sub-national forest projects are likely to be
established incorrectly (through genuine error or political
manoeuvring), resulting in the generation of non-additional
REDD offset offsets which could increase global
greenhouse gas emissions.
2. Can Leakage from NKCAP be
Accurately Quantiﬁed?

“Leakage is the Achilles’ heel to all these
projects.”

(American Electric Power, (2001)) 83

“Through the process of assessing the leakage
prevention activities for the Noel Kempff project
and attempting to quantify leakage from the
averted deforestation activities, it has become
ever more apparent that quantifying leakage is
not a straightforward process.”

(Winrock International (2001)) 84

“Without a national commitment, displacement
or leakage of emissions beyond project
boundaries is particularly difﬁcult to measure.”

(The Eliasch Review, (2008)) 85

A Greenpeace analysis of the NKCAP documents, in
combination with an on-the-ground investigation, has
revealed that leakage from NKCAP does not appear to
have been accurately quantiﬁed or contained.

Major Methodological and Monitoring Problems

To make credible CO2 reductions claims, sub-national
projects must be able to accurately measure, report, and
verify leakage.

NKCAP’s partners have argued that leakage from the
project can be accurately measured, reported, and
veriﬁed.88 When providing submissions and comments
to the UNFCCC89 and the US Congress, the project
investors have generally used a project leakage estimate
of about 15%.90 However, there have been signiﬁcant
problems relating to the monitoring and quantiﬁcation
of leakage resulting from NKCAP. Below we provide
both documentary and testimonial evidence that calls
into question the ability of this project to accurately
monitor and account for leakage, and the discrepancy
between the project reality and statements of the NKCAP
sponsors, which appear to consistently downplay the
scale of leakage actually occurring.

Leakage from Land Conversion: Whatever You
Deﬁne It to Be

The methodologies used to determine leakage
from the project are ﬁlled with gaps, assumptions,
and uncertainties. Rather than addressing the
leakage impacts of deforestation and degradation
comprehensively, the project divided its analysis of
leakage into two components: primary and secondary.91
Primary leakage was deﬁned as deforestation caused by
the conversion of land outside the project area,92 whereas
secondary leakage was characterised by the effect on
timber markets caused by less supply (and increased
prices), which then causes producers in other regions to
harvest more timber from their lands, thereby reducing
the effective amount of carbon conserved.93

The project chose to apply a “people approach” to
monitoring primary leakage, which it found to be much
“simpler” than a geographically-based approach.94
Under this “alternative” approach, it was assumed that
all primary leakage was being caused by the local and
indigenous communities near the project.95 Since the
communities were to receive sustainable development
and alternative livelihood beneﬁts, it was assumed they
would not engage in further land conversion activities
that could result in leakage.96 Winrock International’s
2001 study on leakage, baselines, and carbon beneﬁts
reports that “in the case of the NKCAP, this people-
based approach is the focus of the existing leakage
prevention activities, for example providing alternative
livelihood beneﬁts for local communities. Such activities
have, to date, been successful.”97 Based on the “people
approach,” this assumption seemingly turned into a
conclusion: primary leakage was nil.98

The problem of leakage may be an insurmountable one
to the successful operation of sub-national REDD offset
projects. The relevant literature on leakage suggests that
rates can be anywhere from 10% to more than 100%.86
Others argue that it is impossible to measure accurately.87

The extent of primary leakage was further limited to a
15km “buffer zone” adjacent to the NKCAP.99 It is not
known why a zone of 15km was selected, as opposed to
zones of 5, 50, or 100+ kilometres, or why this particular
strip of land to the west/southwest of the project was

8

CARBON SCAM: Noel Kempff Climate Action Project

chosen. What is known is that the 15km buffer zone
happens to correspond to an area where several local
indigenous communities applied for, and later obtained,
title to lands.100

Needless to say, leakage from destructive forest activities
generally does not end after 15 km.101 The major drivers
of deforestation are global (e.g., agribusiness, palm oil,
logging, etc.), and extend not only across provinces,
but also across nations (and even continents).102 The
justiﬁcation provided for accounting for leakage only
within the buffer zone is that: “In case of subsistence
farmers it is highly unlikely that these people would
travel long distances away from the project area in
order to deforest outside the park what they would
have deforested inside the park otherwise.”103 While this
may provide an explanation for why leakage monitoring
was focused on a particular area, it does not provide
absolution from having to monitor leakage wherever it
may occur. It also does not justify the extremely limited
nature of the buffer zone.

In addition to limiting potential leakage to that which
may occur within a speciﬁc 15 km area, leakage from
the project that may enter the national park adjacent
to NKCAP or cross the nearby border into Brazil is
apparently neither monitored nor accounted for by the
project.104 It is also noted in the methodology that ﬁres,
likely caused by “human settlements” have always
occurred in the park, which would seem to indicate a fair
likelihood of leakage moving to areas other than those
represented by the project, buffer zone, and reference
areas.105 Although the project documents concede that
leakage may occur in the buffer zone or in the park, only
the former is considered.106

It therefore appears that only leakage that occurs within
the designated 15km strip of land to the west/southwest
of the project falls within the purview of the project’s
monitoring and accounting of primary leakage.107 Leakage
to the north, east, or southeast of the project is not

Logging operations just outside the NKP buffer zone. This
indicates that logging operations continued to operate after
the establishment of NKCAP both inside and outside of the
buffer zone

monitored or accounted for, even though the impact to
the atmosphere is the same as it would be for leakage
that occurs in the buffer zone.108

Leakage from Logging

Seven years after the start of NKCAP, the project
failed third party veriﬁcation by SGS due to problems
associated with the project’s “additionality, baseline,
possible leakage, the monitoring plan and the
environmental and social impacts . . . .” 109 Even when
the project was veriﬁed by SGS in 2005, it obtained
a minor Corrective Action Request (CAR) since SGS
found that the logging practices were “not conducted
in a good practice style,” “not well controlled,” and lead
to “more damage . . . and subsequent GHG emissions
than necessary.”110 In September 2009, SGS, the world’s
largest auditor of offset projects, was suspended by
United Nations inspectors for its failure to properly verify
carbon offset projects.111

A saw mill just outside the Noel Kempff park

Logging Companies Continued Operations

Recent conversations with local community members
and logging companies, as well as further research,
indicate that logging companies continued to operate
after the establishment of NKCAP both inside and
outside the buffer zone. Although both of the major
pre-existing logging companies, Moira and San Martin,
left the project area after the project was initiated,
Moira continued to log inside the NKCAP buffer zone
for several years using the same unsustainable logging
practices.112

The San Martin logging company remains in operation
today (2009). When we visited the company, we were
informed by one San Martin worker that the company
still owns and operates a large saw mill for a logging
concession of roughly 119,200 ha just outside the buffer
zone.113 The employee stated that the project partners
had never approached the company for a report of their
logging activities by the project partners, or to inquire
whether the money the company received from the
project had been reinvested into other concessions. We
were informed that the company continued to utilise

CARBON SCAM: Noel Kempff Climate Action Project

9

the same exploitative forestry practices for several
years after it left the project area, but changed to more
sustainable methods as a result of the new Bolivian
forestry law.114

relative to the prior logging activities.125 While the lowered
rate of subsequent emissions may relate to the project’s
emission reductions claims, it is difﬁcult to see how this
cannot be classiﬁed as leakage.

We were also informed that the governmental body in
charge of monitoring these activities, the superintendencia
forestal (Forest Superintendancy),115 has never had the
ability or capacity to monitor the region due to the lack of
personnel and the size of the area. This has meant that
controls are, at best, sporadic and, at worst, a one-time
event. As a result, we were told that some illegal logging
takes place in this region because it is simply too hard to
control. Apparently, the local municipality only started set-
ting up road controls this year (a decade after the start of
NKCAP) but even this effort is primarily aimed at control-
ling and protecting the area from colonisation, not illegal
logging.116

The project documents also note that one of the logging
company owners paid by NKCAP to forfeit his logging
concessions actually used the proceeds of this payment
to purchase “a nearby concession… [which] could be
considered primary leakage.”126 This revealing fact is
quickly downplayed with arguments that the identiﬁed
leakage is “implicitly included” in the dynamic optimisation
model’s simulations (explained below)127 and “the
nearby concession would likely have been undertaken
regardless.”128 The documents then note that “much of
the equipment” used for logging was retired, and that
the “direct movement of capital” to the new concessions
“appears to be fairly limited; etc.”129

Modelling Emissions versus Monitoring Emissions
from Logging

Rather than utilise a combination of remote sensing and
ground-based monitoring to measure actual leakage
from logging companies, the project relies heavily upon
a modelling experiment that simulates logging responses
to various supply and demand variables.117 As a result,
the leakage ﬁgures from NKCAP are not measurable,
reportable, and veriﬁable estimates based on real
world monitoring, but rather predictions based on the
assumptions of the “dynamic optimisation model of
Bolivian timber markets.”118

Based on these assumptions, the model predicted a 14
to 44% risk that emissions from displaced logging would
leak to areas outside the project area, with the lower ﬁgure
assuming “elastic” demand and the higher ﬁgure indicating
the likelihood of leakage if demand is “inelastic.”119 These
ﬁgures are commonly touted to promote NKCAP.120
However, the project’s background documents also
predicted that long-term leakage could be as high as
60%,121 and note that the risks of long-term leakage could
not be predicted with any sort of accuracy.122

The Project Design Documents relating to NKCAP identify
some potential instances of leakage from logging, but
then quickly explain them away. For instance, logging
activities that commenced in the buffer zone after the
initiation of the project would normally be considered
leakage, and the project document notes that, “At
ﬁrst glance, one might classify this loss of biomass as
leakage.123 However, the project documents explain
that these activities may have been community forestry
projects supported and ﬁnanced by the NKCAP, and that
the emissions from these activities were less than those
from the harvesting activities in the same area before
the project began.124 It is then concluded that even if the
activities were a displacement related to the project, it
was not leakage because the new logging activities did
not result in an increase in greenhouse gas emissions

Despite the need for serious monitoring of leakage
from logging, and aside from the predictive modelling
experiment, the project developers appear to have
placed signiﬁcant hopes on a questionable, short-term
“monitoring” technique. In short, NKCAP struck an
agreement with the indemniﬁed logging companies to
track their future expenditures to ensure that they weren’t
merely using the indemniﬁcation monies to purchase
logging concessions elsewhere.130 Arguments over the
relative merits of this “monitoring” method are somewhat
mooted, since the agreement to track the expenditures
of concessionaires following indemniﬁcation was limited
to ﬁve years (and has since expired).131 As noted above,
recent conversations with the logging companies indicate
that their expenditures may not have been fully tracked
during the ﬁve year period and that logging has continued
in the areas surrounding NKCAP. Nonetheless, the
NKCAP deemed this limited effort “sufﬁcient for analysis
of leakage” from the project.132
3. Are Emission Reductions
From NKCAP Additional?
“Additionality is at the crux of an offset’s
integrity. . . . [I]t may be impossible to accurately
determine what ‘would have happened anyway’
for some projects.”

(Congressional Research Service, (2008))133

“It was not until 1999 when San Martin started
using Sustainable Forest Management practices,
which was an obligation by the Bolivian law, and
not a product coming out from the NKCAP”

(Anonymous worker at the San Martin Saw Mill (2009))134

Additionality requires proof that the emissions reductions
achieved by a project are genuinely and quantiﬁably
supplemental to what would have otherwise occurred.
NKCAP’s partners claim that the project directly resulted
— in emissions reductions from deforestation and
degradation that would not taken place had it not been

10 CARBON SCAM: Noel Kempff Climate Action Project

GIS mapping of the extent of deforestation occurring in
Bolivia in 1992, 2001 and 2004

1992

2001

2004

implemented.135 They argue that deforestation and
logging would have continued and that the additionality
of the project “is obvious.”136 However, Greenpeace has
discovered evidence indicating that NKCAP may not be
demonstrably additional, calling into question arguments
that the project’s additionality can be proven in a
measurable, reportable, and veriﬁable manner.

Legal Coattails

Greenpeace has uncovered two problems with this
claim. First, in 1996 — one year before NKCAP was
established — Bolivia passed the 1996 National Forestry
Law (Ley Forestal No. 1700).137 This law introduced new
harvesting restrictions on all logging companies within
Bolivia, and required a signiﬁcant number of the existing
logging concessionaires to submit management plans for
sustainable harvest. These new requirements changed
the economics of logging in the Noel Kempff area in a
way that could have partly, or completely, shut down
existing timber activities regardless of the project. The
2001 report by Winrock International on NKCAP leakage,
baselines, and carbon beneﬁts highlights the “substantial
difﬁculties” of separating the effect of the law from the
efﬁcacy of NKCAP.138 It also reports that the new law
reduced the area of land under concession in Bolivia by
75%,139 which is independent of NKCAP’s establishment.

National Deforestation Rates on the Rise

While the NKCAP was generating sub-national offsets
based on reductions in deforestation the project was
allegedly providing at the sub-national level, the national
deforestation rate in Bolivia was actually increasing (in
percentage terms).140 Indeed, a recent study of lowland
areas in Bolivia found that while about 3 million hectares
of forest were lost between 1990 to 2004, almost half
of that deforestation occurred in the last four years of
that time frame.141 This information raises questions on
the project’s emission reduction claims, speciﬁcally with
regard to both leakage and additionality.

Since there does not appear to have been any
stringent, ongoing real world monitoring program for
potential leakage from NKCAP, one can only speculate
as to the extent to which the project has been
successful in actually reducing overall deforestation
and degradation emissions. One could argue that
Bolivia’s national deforestation emissions would have
been even higher in the absence of the project, but
such discussions quickly devolve into a game of “what
ifs,” generating serious questions not only about the
accuracy of the reported emissions reductions, but
also the additionality of the project as a whole (see
section below). Given the problems identiﬁed with
the methodologies for the establishment of baselines
and accounting for leakage from NKCAP, it seems
impossible to determine whether the project resulted in
real, measurable, quantiﬁable, and veriﬁable emission
reductions.

CARBON SCAM: Noel Kempff Climate Action Project

11

The problems of demonstrating additionality would be
signiﬁcantly reduced by requiring national-level REDD.
Countries would receive ﬁnancial and other incentives
for reducing their emissions relative to a national
baseline, which would be based on information currently
available on national deforestation rates dating back to
1990.142 Continued payments would be made based
on a countries progress towards halting deforestation
by an agreed upon date.143 As progress is made from
national historical deforestation rates towards a halting of
deforestation the question of what “would have occurred”
becomes subsumed by the longstanding protection of
forests at the national level.
4. Are the Emission Reductions
from Noel Kempff Permanent?

“Emissions from forests are irreversible.”

(Anna Lehmann, Chair, Carbon Markets and Investors
Association’s (CMIA) (2008))144

A fundamental requirement for the success and credibility
of REDD offset projects is that emissions reductions are
permanent, i.e., that the avoided CO2 emissions are kept
out of the atmosphere for an amount of time comparable
with how long the fossil fuel emissions the project is
designed to offset interfere with the climate. Were this not
the case, greenhouse gas emissions in the atmosphere
would rise because, in addition to the extra fossil fuel
emissions, the carbon stored in the REDD offset project
would eventually be released and also end up in the
atmosphere alongside the fossil carbon they were meant
to offset. Despite the importance of ensuring permanence
of emission reductions where they justify additional fossil
fuel emissions, there is little evidence that NKCAP can
guarantee emissions reductions over time.

 Despite the fact that NKCAP is part of a scheme of
protected areas within Bolivia, threats to the permanence
of the park are numerous. FAN’s submission to the
UNFCCC on REDD145 and Bolivia’s recent R-PIN146
both highlight the country’s “high deforestation rates [of]
around 250,000 ha /year.” Both list forest ﬁres as one of
Bolivia’s principle drivers of deforestation,147 adding to the
risk of change in vegetation cover in the years to come,148
e.g., from drought, forest die back, pest infestation,
disease, political turnover.149 These risks mean that the
CO2 supposedly sequestered or locked up for good
in the project area may eventually be released into the
atmosphere.

If a company such as AEP, Paciﬁcorp or BP had
already used the carbon stored in a forest to offset their
emissions at home, in the event of a forest ﬁre or other
occurrence mentioned above, that CO2 will be released,
resulting in twice the volume of CO2 in the atmosphere.

Although NKCAP’s partners set up a $1.5 million
endowment fund to insure the project’s longevity and
therefore its “ﬁnancial permanence,”150 Greenpeace
has been unable to ﬁnd evidence of a carbon reserve

12 CARBON SCAM: Noel Kempff Climate Action Project

or buffer fund beyond a 5% discount factor which was
subtracted off the volume of forest carbon stocks in order
to compensate for the risk that CO2 emissions may occur
from possible future ﬁres.151

Such reserves are commonly used and discussed
among REDD proponents today. Carbon reserves act as
insurance against inherent and unforeseen circumstances
such as deforestation, ﬁres, drought, die back or disease,
that result in the release of CO2 emissions. These
unforeseen changes in vegetation cover pose an intrinsic
risk that carbon sequestration will not be permanent,
making it common practise to put anywhere from 20-60%
of the project’s carbon offsets into a reserve.

Two other actions cast further doubt on the prospect
that the avoided carbon emissions claimed by NKCAP’s
partners will be permanent. First, although the risk of
leakage is ongoing, the project partners have argued
that “it is unreasonable to expect” the project to be
the cause of leakage after a given period of time,
and suggest limiting their liability for releases to 10
years.152 Second, the ability to monitor leakage from
the indemniﬁed concessionaires formerly in the project
area was reliant upon tracking the expenditures of the
owners of the concessions.153 However, the contracted
requirement to provide data on the purchase of new
concessions was limited to a term of ﬁve years (which
has since expired).154
5. Community Beneﬁts

“We only found out two months ago about the
contract and we tried to renegotiate the term but
now we just want it to be cancelled.”

(Victor Hugo Vela, indigenous peoples representatives of
the Chiquotano tribe and head of the Coordinating Body of
Indigenous Organisations of Bolivia, (2009))155

The second objective of NKCAP was to enable the affected
communities to develop sustainably once they had stopped
logging. However, there appear to be large disparities

Medical centre and portable water facilities in Florida. The
NKCAP was supposed to have provided these services,
however our informants claim that these were rather
provided by the local municipial

between the claims of the project investors and the local
communities regarding the outcomes of these efforts.

Conﬂicts with local communities began early on.
The Project Design Document states that “a formal
consultation of communities before the project
implementation was not done”156 and that the
communities rejected the proposed expansion of the Park
into the Climate Action Project.157 This precipitated the
creation of the Central Indígena Bajo Paraguá (CIBAPA),158
a federation of communities and peoples within the
buffer zone, and the Comite de Gestion (Management
Committee), a local forum comprising of CIBAPA, the
local municipality, FAN, SERNAP,159 and project managers
in order to discuss issues surrounding the project.

Despite this, SGS declined to certify any carbon offsets
in 2004 because a socio-economic assessment had
not been carried out.160 When one eventually took place
in 2005, it identiﬁed negative impacts engendered by
the project including: “loss of access to the resources,
no abatement on the use of fauna for hunting, loss of
transport and road infrastructure, and the loss of income
from employment and services provided by the Moira
sawmill.”161 This assessment further highlighted the fact
that the creation of a “new action plan” that set targets,
timetables, and indicators to be monitored had not yet
been created.

Local communities informed Greenpeace of a meeting
held by the Management Committee of the Project
(Comite de Gestion)162 on June 27, 2009. At this meeting,
the projects partners and the role of carbon offsets were
described to members of the local communities.163 This
was the ﬁrst time that many community members were
presented with this information — despite the fact that
the project had been in operation for over a decade.

A Dispute of Facts

In 2001, AEP and its partners asserted in front of US
Congress that the project had signiﬁcantly beneﬁted164
local communities by establishing revolving loan funds
for micro-enterprises (e.g., heart-of-palm plantings, agro
forestry projects, animal husbandry, and bee keeping), to
compensate — for the loss of jobs and tax revenue from
the terminated logging concessions.165 AEP continues to
make many of these claims.166 However, one community
member we spoke to discredited these assertions.

No, the Noel Kempff project has not initiated any
micro credit projects. The only palmito plantation
in the area belonged to a private owner until a
few years ago, when the CIBAPA President[167]
bought the plantation [with no beneﬁts to the
communities]. The Noel Kempff project did not
help us with palmito plantations here in the
TCO.[168] . . . Noel Kempff has not brought any
beneﬁts to the communities . . . there is nothing
here . . . this is why the Noel Kempff project has
been negative for us.169

Further, local community members we interviewed spoke
of ineffective attempts by NKCAP administrators to
provide alternate livelihoods, trainings, and new skills. For
example, one community member revealed that

“APOCOM[170] bought a herd of cows for the
community, but they bought the wrong breed
— a European breed that could not survive in
this type of [tropical] environment. They all died
in the end. The cows were so expensive that
a whole herd of local breeds could have been
bought for the price of a single one.”171

With regards to the agro-forest projects, “they
only provided technical help for a couple of
days, and after that no more capacity was given
to us or any money to actually buy the seeds or
animals to initiate the projects.”172

AEP also testiﬁed in 2001 that the project partners had
provided funding for other things such as the repairing
of roads and bridges, improving schools and healthcare,
as well as installing portable water supplies.173 Although
FAN claims that the project did provide support in terms
of the construction of schools and medical centres, the
community member we spoke to told us otherwise.

“The Noel Kempff project has not helped us
to construct the community’s [Florida] school,
medical centre and the potable water, or
maintained the road coming into Florida. This
was done by the municipal in San Ignacio. The
Noel Kempff project only helped [through FAN]
with refurbishing the roof of the school, that is
all. . . . . [T]the roads are in ruin, as you can see
here...the Noel Kempff project was supposed
to maintain the roads so that the people living
here and tourists could easily access the
communities. Now it is impossible. And there
are very few tourists that come now since they
cannot travel here.” 174

A neglected road inside the park

CARBON SCAM: Noel Kempff Climate Action Project

13

Lack of Oversight & Failed Initiatives

FAN had day-to-day administrative responsibility for
NKCAP until 2006. Since then, the Bolivian Protected
Areas National Service (SERNAP) has had responsibility
for the project and the park.175 However, Greenpeace
has obtained a leaked contract between SERNAP
and FAN signed on 24 June 2009, which established
the cooperation of FAN and SERNAP over the future
administration of Bolivian National Protected Areas (such
as NKCAP). This means that ofﬁcially, the project has
been left unattended and without a day-to-day manager
for over three years — something that was conﬁrmed by
community members, park guards, and personnel at the
Noel Kempff Museum.176 This perhaps partly explains the
following.

AEP testiﬁed in front of US Congress in 2001 that they
had invested in “an ecotourism destination in the Park,
complete with lodging facilities and a visitor center,” in aid
of the project’s long-term protection.177 This venture was
overseen and run by FAN.178 Our investigation in Bolivia
revealed that although the ecotourism venture was started
in two locations and lodges were built, they have rarely
been used in the last few years, partly due to the state
of the roads. Since FAN lost oversight responsibilities in
2006, buildings have fallen into disrepair.179

AEP has also claimed in front of US Congress to have
made “investments in for-proﬁt Bolivian companies that
produce and sell organic, sustainably produced foods,”
as well as investments in the discovery and genetic
reproduction of new species of ﬂora and fauna.180 Our
research revealed the former existence of “Canopy
Botanicals SRL,”, a private venture company that was set
up to fund the ecotourism project — and earn additional

returns for NKCAP and its investors. Original projections
estimated annual income from Canopy of as much as
$300,000.181 However, Canopy Botanicals has since
been dissolved.182 Furthermore, a proposed research and
bio-prospecting company “Canopy Pharmaceuticals”183
appears never to have materialised.
6. The Money Trail

“These are some of the cheapest credits the
world will ever know.”

(American Electric Power, (2000))184

“The expectation is that the credits [from Noel
Kempff] will become marketable on commodity
exchanges in the next few years, although no
trading structure yet exists. When this happens,
the companies may realise a tidy proﬁt.”

(Birchard, 2000)185

“The Bolivian project…could save AEP billions
of dollars in pollution controls if international
agreement is reached on a treaty to prevent
global warming…It’s very signiﬁcant and it’s very
inexpensive, in comparison to other alternatives
for reducing carbon dioxide emissions within our
own system.”

(American Electric Power (2000))186

Sub-national REDD projects such as Noel Kempff would
allow some of the dirtiest companies on the planet to
pollute at “business as usual” levels for a very cheap
price.187 This is no secret. In 2000, AEP reported that
it invested in Bolivia because it would be seven times
cheaper to purchase such offsets than to reduce their
own emissions.188

Table 2. Noel Kempff reported emissions savings to the US Department of Energy’s 1605b voluntary reporting of GHG
emissions reductions programme

Year

NKCAP Reported emission reduction ﬁgures as submitted to the US DOE
1605b voluntary reporting of emissions reductions programme

Cumulative total (tonnes CO2)

(Yearly reported ﬁgures added
together from 1997-2004)

1997

1998

1999

2000

1 million metric tonnes of CO2 reported as avoided by the 3 energy company
partners.

1 million

Unable to locate a ﬁgure but using the average of 1997 and 1999 gives a total of
1.35 million.

~2.35 million

1.77 million metric tonnes of CO2 reported as avoided by AEP and Paciﬁcorp on
their shares in Noel Kempff.

4.12 million

1.88 million metric tonnes of CO2 reported as avoided by the 3 energy company
partners.

6 million

2001

803,484 metric tonnes of CO2 reported as avoided by AEP and Paciﬁcorp.

2002

2003

2004

211,272 metric tonnes of CO2 reported as avoided by AEP and Paciﬁcorp.

243,660 metric tonnes of CO2 reported as avoided by the 3 energy company
partners on their shares in Noel Kempff.

180,000 metric tonnes of CO2 reported as avoided by AEP and Paciﬁcorp on their
shares in Noel Kempff.

6.8 million

7.01 million

7.25 million

7.43 million (already way over the
“up to” 5.8 million they predict for
the 30 years of the project)

14 CARBON SCAM: Noel Kempff Climate Action Project

The estimated carbon beneﬁts of the NKCAP have been
reduced by 90% since 1997. Had they allocated their
offset shares already, AEP, Paciﬁcorp, and BP would have
been operating their day-to-day business on the false
assumption that the project was offsetting a much larger
amount of CO2 than it was.189 In 2005, SGS veriﬁed that
the project had offset only about 1 million metric tonnes
of CO2 in the years it had been operating.190

The ﬁgures reported to the US Department of Energy’s
1605b program over a 7 year period (1997-2004) for AEP,
Paciﬁcorp, and BP’s carbon shares in NKCAP (see table
2. page 14) total about 7.4 million tonnes of CO2 for this
period. This is far greater than the amount veriﬁed by SGS
for the entire 30-year lifespan of the project (5.8 million
tonnes CO2).191 This means that the NKCAP investors
may have claimed millions of tonnes of CO2 emissions
reductions that never occurred. If such carbon offsets had
been used in a regulatory, rather than a voluntary carbon
regime, such claims would not only be greenwash, they
could have led to an overall increase in global greenhouse
gas emissions by — allowing regulated facilities to utilise
government sanctioned offsets of questionable value
instead of reducing their own emissions.

As a member of the Chicago Climate Exchange (CCX),
AEP committed to reduce or offset 4% of its total
greenhouse gas emissions between 2003-2006. Through
this commitment, the company expects to reduce or
offset an estimated 18 million tonnes of carbon dioxide
emissions.192 AEP reports that through its forestry/
terrestrial sequestration activities such as its investment
in NKCAP,193 it has made “substantial greenhouse
gas reductions.” AEP reports that the total volume
sequestered by these projects is 18 million tonnes of
CO2.194

Financial Risks to the Public

“Climate change mitigation legislation will
happen, even as the scientiﬁc community
debates the timing and magnitude of climate
change. The driving force will not be the politics,
but the ﬁnance. Powerful ﬁnancial market
participants are swinging into place behind it,
whatever their politics.”

(Talking about Noel Kempff – Jeremy Weinstein, lawyer for
Paciﬁcorp, (2000))195

Voluntary carbon markets more than doubled in value
between 2007 and 2008 totalling $705 million in 2008
with 123 million tonnes.196 Over the same time period, the
compliance market of the EU ETS increased in value by
87%, from $49 billion to $92 billion. Added together, this
means that the total value of carbon markets doubled
from $63 billion in 2007 to $126 billion in 2008.197

By 2020, this market is forecast to be worth $2-3
trillion,198 with a large percentage of this trade occurring
among brokers and traders who will be moving the same

offset credit back and forth depending on carbon price
forecasts.199 Already this form of “secondary” trading is
outstripping the direct exchange of the credits between
offset projects and the ﬁnal user of the credit. With a
further increase in secondary trading, the volume of
the trade increasingly becomes a poor indication for
the volume of actual emissions achieved: the same
credit or permit will be traded back and forth multiple
times, resulting in the volume of trading increasing
without a corresponding increase in emissions cuts, and
corresponding atmospheric beneﬁts.

Given the size and value of these markets, the increasing
use of carbon derivatives and speculative trading,
and the lessons learned from the ﬁnancial crash, the
potential risks of low quality REDD project offsets should
be apparent. Had NKCAP offsets been traded as part
of a compliance market in 1997, on the basis of a 55
million CO2 tonnes claim, a signiﬁcant disruption would
have occurred following the downwards revision of the
emissions reduction estimate of the project, from about
55 million tonnes of CO2 to “up to” 5.8 million tonnes. If
traded on a large scale, sub-national REDD offsets could
undermine the integrity of carbon markets, creating grave
implications for the climate, economies, government
budgets, and taxpayers.

Carbon Prices: Then versus Now

Greenpeace has analysed the data and the ﬁgures
surrounding the investments of AEP, Paciﬁcorp, and BP,
and the results are revealing. In 1997, the power companies
made their investments based on the belief that they were
purchasing a tonne of CO2 at about $0.20, the equivalent
of ﬁve tonnes of CO2 per dollar.200 Economists at the time
forecast these tonnes of CO2 could expect to sell for
between $15-175 per tonne, providing proﬁts between 75-
875 times the original investments.

In 2009, AEP reported that the cost per tonne of the
CO2 was actually higher than anticipated ($7.60 per
tonne CO2), primarily due to the costs of the carbon
monitoring measures.201 On the basis of these ﬁgures,
had they been used in regulatory markets, the partners’
project investments potentially could have yielded proﬁts
of almost 300% (based on current compliance market
prices).202 However, given the signiﬁcantly lower prices
found on the voluntary markets, the investor’s current
investments into NKCAP may result in ﬁnancial losses.203

This demonstrates the powerful incentive to minimise
implementation costs for REDD offset projects. As
more money is spent on actual monitoring, community
beneﬁts, biodiversity protection, and other safeguards,
the cost of the offsets rise and potential proﬁts decline. If
the Clean Energy Jobs and American Power Act, were to
become law, it could create a strong incentive to deliver
poor-quality, but proﬁtable, REDD offsets to a rapidly
expanding carbon market.

CARBON SCAM: Noel Kempff Climate Action Project

15

Proposed US climate legislation would allow for a
maximum of two billion tonnes of offsets per year for US
polluters to use in place of reducing their own emissions,
75% of which may be from international sources. REDD
offsets are the only offsets described in detail in the bill,
and they are also the principle source of offsets for the
Strategic Reserve — a mechanism designed to keep
carbon costs low.

When speaking of effects that 2 billion tonnes of offsets
will have on industry, Rick Boucher, a Congressman from
Virginia, said that an “...electric utility burning coal will not
have to reduce the emissions at the plant site. It can
just keep burning coal.” The Congressional Budget Ofﬁce
(CBO), which evaluates legislation for the US Congress,
estimates that if the offsets in ACES are fully exploited, the
US will only begin to reduce emissions in 2018.204

Banking Offsets

In anticipation of limitations being placed on their
emissions, companies such as AEP, PaciﬁCorp, and
BP, as well as others, have been able to create a kind
of “carbon bank” of offsets. Under the proposed ACES
rules, companies will be able to use these banked credits,
which they obtained at relatively cheap prices, instead
of, or in addition to, the emission allowances allocated to
them under the program.

This has two advantages for the companies: where
they received the emission allowances (or permits) free
of charge (such as under the EU Emissions Trading
Scheme), they can use cheap offsets to meet their
emissions reduction requirements and sell the excess
emission allowances they received for free under the
cap and trade scheme at a proﬁt, as these allowances
trade at a higher value than offsets. Alternatively, if the
company’s allocated allowances are not sufﬁcient to
cover its emissions, it can use these banked offsets
to exceed the emissions limit — the cap — while still
claiming compliance with the emissions limit.

As a result, the largest carbon emitters not only could
use sub-national REDD offsets to continue polluting at
business as usual levels, but actually stand to reap large
windfall proﬁts for their investment in such projects. There is
therefore a massive ﬁnancial incentive for project investors
to have projects currently limited to the voluntary carbon
markets sanctioned by governments for trade on current
and future regulatory markets. While the current price of
carbon on the voluntary markets hovers at less than $0.20
per tonne of CO2 equivalent, allowances on the regulatory
markets are trading for about $20 per unit.205
7. Conclusions from Research
and Investigation into NKCAP
As a result of their inherent deﬁciencies, sub-national
offsets for REDD do not constitute a legitimate climate
mitigation practice, and in fact, could harm the global effort
to reduce emissions. Although NKCAP has been hailed

as a successful model for sub-national offset projects,
a careful analysis of the documentation relating to the
project, combined with on-the-ground interviews and
research, indicates that the project has failed to meet its
own claims to properly monitor and account for leakage,
prove additionality, and guarantee its permanence for the
foreseeable future. Despite over $10 million in ﬁnancing
and 12 years of operation, the model for sub-national
REDD offsets has yet to produce real, measurable,
reportable, and veriﬁable emission reductions.

Should the UNFCCC or US Congress allow sub-national
REDD offsets into the compliance markets, the result
would be a government-sanctioned use of offsets of
highly questionable value.206 These offsets likely would
not have provided the quantiﬁable emission reductions
anticipated under the existing emissions cap, and a
strong argument can be made that they would have
increased global greenhouse gas emissions by allowing
a company (such as AEP) to continue to pollute while
purchasing offsets which cannot be depended upon to
provide real emission reductions.207
8. Greenpeace policy
recommendations
Deforestation and forest degradation are costing the world’s
economy $ 2 to 5 trillion per year in losses of biodiversity
and ecosystem services — more than Wall Street lost during
the current ﬁnancial crisis.208 Across all tropical forests, more
than one million hectares are lost each month, resulting
in the release of more greenhouse gas than the monthly
emissions of the entire European Union.

In order to give the world the best chance to keep
global temperature rise as far below 2°C as possible,
Greenpeace is calling on countries to commit to the goal
of ending deforestation globally by 2020. To achieve
this goal, world leaders must agree at the Copenhagen
climate conference in December 2009 to create a new
global fund for forests. This fund should be based
primarily on ﬁnancing raised through the auctioning of
emission allowances in the amount of $40 billion per year
to protect the world’s remaining tropical forests by 2020.
We estimate that the US contribution to the fund to be
about $16 billion per year — less than the government
has given to a single company, AIG, in the last ten
months ($173 billion). The EU contribution is estimated at
approximately $14 billion per year. Given the estimated
costs of climate change,209 quick and equitable action on
deforestation would save taxpayers signiﬁcant climate-
related costs in the future.

1) National Level Actions to Achieve Zero
Deforestation

Greenpeace believes that each country should do its
fair share in combating global climate change and that
approaches are needed that reduce transaction costs,
ensure the integrity of baselines, and prevent the problem
of leakage, non-additionality, and impermanence.

16 CARBON SCAM: Noel Kempff Climate Action Project

Therefore, we urge countries to support REDD
mechanisms with national accounting for emissions and
where policies and approaches are coordinated at the
national level. In countries that lack signiﬁcant national
capacities, sub-national activities could be directly
ﬁnanced through a forest fund based on public and
market-link ﬁnancing (such as the auctioning of emission
allowanced, rather than ﬁnanced through questionable
carbon offset schemes through carbon markets. While
such ﬁnancing may be defensible when projects have
objectives in addition to emission reductions, such as
biodiversity protection, they are not when the objective is
global climate protection. National-level emissions should
be the starting point for any discussion on offsets relating
to REDD — project and sub-national approaches which
generate offsets (even if time-limited) via carbon markets
should in no circumstances play a role in global regulatory
efforts to address global climate change.

At the last UNFCCC Conference of Parties (in Poznan),
tropical forest countries like Brazil, Indonesia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Papua New Guinea
(PNG), and others signalled a strong consensus and
willingness to make national-level approaches to REDD.210
Yet, in some cases, industrialised countries are ironically
demanding less of developing countries on climate change
than developing countries are demanding of themselves.
The current American Clean Energy and Security Act
(ACES) bill before the US Senate would allow sub-national
offsets in developing countries, essentially allowing certain
countries to set up small parks rather than taking actions
to protect their forests nationwide.211

2) A Global Problem Demands a Global Solution

Greenpeace believes that the urgency of the climate
change crisis demands that emissions from deforestation
be addressed quickly and equitably with the goal of halting
gross emissions from deforestation by 2020. It is our ﬁrm
belief that a new forest fund adopted to achieve this goal,
based on agreements among developed and developing
countries, is most likely to provide effective, long-term forest
protection, which in turn will provide the global community
the most cost-effective means of addressing deforestation.
Funding should be directed to countries whose actions
demonstrate a commitment to ending destructive forest
practices and the long-term protection of biodiversity values,
while fully respecting the rights of indigenous peoples and
local communities. Such agreements between developed
and developing countries could more easily be adopted
within the conﬁnes of a forest fund, and would be difﬁcult to
address through the carbon markets.

At the UNFCCC Conference in Copenhagen (December
2009), countries should create and immediately
operationalise a new global fund for forests. A fund could
get more countries with tropical forests involved more
quickly — than an approach based on offsets in the
carbon markets.212 Approaches and agreements could be
made with countries as diverse as Brazil, the Democratic

Republic of the Congo, and Indonesia. Developed
countries would avoid the inefﬁciencies that would
come with each country creating its own rules while also
guaranteeing a certain minimal standard for all REDD
activities. Furthermore, a fund could provide payment for
the incremental costs achieving REDD, which could be
close to the actual costs of achieving those reductions.
Whereas a recent report on the economics of REDD
offsets found that the separation between the cost of
REDD and the carbon market clearing price could be as
high as 600%, leading to the inefﬁcient expenditure of
limited mitigation ﬁnancing.213

3) The 2°C Goal: Avoiding Catastrophe for the
Climate and the Forests

To avoid catastrophic climate change, global temperature
rise must be kept as far below 2°C as possible.214 The
IPCC has found that reductions by Annex I countries
in the range of 25-40% by 2020 (from 1990 levels) are
necessary merely to keep global temperature rise to
between 2.0-2.4°C. Yet, Greenpeace has found that the
currently stated targets of developed countries amount to
only a 11-17% reduction at best. The inclusion of REDD
offsets in the carbon markets would do nothing to bridge
the gap between the currently stated targets and the
magnitude of reductions demanded by the science.215

According to recent modelling by the Met Ofﬁce Hadley
Centre (UK), the probability of irreversibly losing much of
the Amazon forest to climate-related impact increases
dramatically above a 2°C rise in temperature.216 The
creation of a new global fund for forests to provide
reductions that are additional to domestic actions could
achieve reductions up to and beyond the IPCC range. To
save the climate we must protect the forests. And to save
the forests; we must protect the climate.

4) Protection of Indigenous Rights and Biodiversity

A REDD mechanism must ensure that beneﬁts are
equitably shared both among and within countries, and
reach those whose livelihoods depend on these forests.
It should prioritise the protection of intact natural forests
(which store more carbon and are more resilient to
climate change) and prevent perverse incentives such as
the conversion of forests into plantations which hold less
carbon and biodiversity than natural forests, and are less
resilient to the impacts of climate change). This requires
an approach that can actively promote both carbon and
biodiversity values, while fully respecting the rights of
local and indigenous peoples. Studies of project-based
market mechanisms such as the Clean Development
Mechanism, demonstrate that they have little regard for
values other than carbon.217 The oversight that would
accompany a fund should be expected to better ensure
that biodiversity and indigenous peoples’ rights are
properly considered and promoted.

CARBON SCAM: Noel Kempff Climate Action Project

17

END NOTES

1  H. Select Comm. on Energy Indep. and Global Warming, 110th Cong. 7 (February
14, 2008) (Testimony of Stephanie Meeks, Acting President and CEO, The Nature
Conservancy) [hereinafter “Meeks Testimony”], available at <http://globalwarming.
house.gov/tools/assets/ﬁles/0347.pdf>

2

Brown, S., Land Use and Forests, Carbon Monitoring, and Global Change,
Cooperative Agreement between Winrock International and the EPA (ID# CR
827293-01-0), Product 10, Report of leakage analysis for the Noel Kempff
averted deforestation component, Winrock International May 2002 [hereinafter
“Brown Leakage Report”], at 7-8, 15. <http://www.winrock.org/ecosystems/ﬁles/
Product%2010%20leakage%20Noel%20Kempff.pdf>

3  Carbon-trading market hit by UN suspension of clean-energy auditor, The Times,
Danny Fortson, Georgia Warren (13 Sept. 2009). (“The legitimacy of the $100
billion (£60 billion) carbon-trading market has been called into question after
the world’s largest auditor of clean-energy projects was suspended by United
Nations inspectors. SGS UK had its accreditation suspended last week after it was
unable to prove its staff had properly vetted projects that were then approved for
the carbon-trading scheme, or even that they were qualiﬁed to do so.”); Carbon
market under ﬁre as UN suspends British CDM project accreditor (James Murray,
BusinessGreen, 14 Sep 2009).

4  Winrock International (2002). Analysis of Leakage, Baselines and Carbon Beneﬁts

for the Noel Kempff Climate Action Project (hereinafter “Winrock Leakage Analysis”),
at 31-32, available at <http://conserveonline.org/library/Noel_Kempff_report.doc/
view.html>

5

6

See, for example, the Ministerial Declaration on REDD produced on 12 December
2008, following the UNFCCC Conference held in Poznan, Poland. Drawn up at
the initiative of the United Kingdom, it is a joint-statement that sets out what both
rainforest countries and the international community should be working towards
in order to protect tropical forests. According to the EC Press Release, The
developing countries involved show their willingness to develop national REDD
strategies in cooperation with relevant stakeholders, including indigenous peoples,
other civil society groups and the private sector. Establishing national systems
for monitoring, reporting and verifying emissions and emission cuts will be vital in
order to produce credible results.” Press Release, Climate change: Commission
endorses Poznan declaration on reducing emissions from deforestation,
December 12, 2008, available at <http://europa.eu/rapid/pressReleasesAction.
do?reference=IP/08/1965>. The content of the joint ministerial statement is fully in
line with the EU Commission’s strategy for REDD, presented on 17 October 2008
and endorsed by the Council of EU Environment Ministers on 4 December 2008. Id.

In a letter to shareholders in its 2004 annual report, AEP’s chairman claimed that
the company was an “industry leader in addressing global climate change,” and the
company asserts that it is a “steward of the environment.” AEP IRRC Greenhouse
Gas Proﬁle, supra note 6, at 2, 3, retrieved from the AEP website on October 2,
2009, available at <www.aep.com/environmental/reports/docs/AEP_IRRC_Proﬁle.
pdf>. The company publically committed to reducing/offsetting its greenhouse gas
emissions by 10% (or 18 million tonnes of CO2) between 2003 and 2006, through
its voluntary membership of the Chicago Climate Exchange — a goal reinforced
by its participation in the US Department of Energy’s voluntary reduction of
greenhouse gas emissions 1605b programme, and Climate Challenge Programme.
Id. at 3. AEP reports that between 1991 and 2002, it made registered avoided
emissions of 22,200,000 tonnes of CO2, and by 2010, the company expects to
have avoided emissions of 46,000,000 tonnes of CO2 – through the purchase of
emission reduction credits, amongst other measures. Id. at 4. It lists its investment
in Noel Kempff (as well as other projects) as part of the company’s forestry activities
to reduce CO2 concentrations in the atmosphere — and that more than 20 million
tonnes of CO2 will be offset over 40 years as a result. Id. at p 7. Internal company
documents reveal that “international forestry offsets will be used towards AEP’s
voluntary reduction goals” and that Noel Kempff is one of these international
projects. Bruce Braine, AEP’s International Forestry Project Experiences
[powerpoint slides] [hereinafter “Braine Forestry Project Experiences Presentation”],
at slide 2, 4, retrieved from Electric Power Research Institute’s website on
October 2, 2009, available at <http://mydocs.epri.com/docs/PublicMeetingMa
terials/0905/4SNGEB5QK69/E232009_Braine_REDD_EPRI_Offsets_W5_Final.
pdf> Further AEP’s Corporate Sustainability report (2009) at 20, reports that “The
international forestry projects undertaken to offset our carbon emissions are located
in biodiversity “hot spots,” such as Bolivia..” <http://www.aep.com/citizenship/
crreport/docs/CS_Report_2009_web.pdf>

7

8

The Clean Energy Jobs and American Power Act (Kerry-Boxer, 30 Sept. 2009),
at <http://www.epw.senate.gov/public/index.cfm?FuseAction=PressRoom.
PressReleases&ContentRecord_id=0C00344C-802A-23AD-4F4D-
EDB0C9408D2E>; see also Congressional Budget Ofﬁce Cost Estimate: H.R. 2454
American Clean Energy and Security Act of 2009, CBO, June 5, 2009, at <http://
www.cbo.gov/ftpdocs/102xx/doc10262/hr2454.pdf>; Jesse Jenkins, Climate Bill
Analysis, Part 12: CBO Projects Waxman-Markey Would Cut Cumulative Emissions
by Just 2% through 2020, Breakthrough Institute, June 15, 2009 at <http://
thebreakthrough.org/blog/2009/06/climate_bill_analysis_part_xii.shtml>

See, for example, TNC policy advisor Rane Cortez’s blog on reducing emissions
from deforestation — describing Noel Kempff as the “ﬁrst and best known REDD
project in the world.” <http://blog.nature.org/2009/08/what-do-conservation-and-
policy-have-to-do-with-each-other/>, (last visited on Oct. 1, 2009).

9  Carbon Sequestration: Measurements and Beneﬁts Hearing Before the S.

Subcomm. on Sci. Tech., and Space of the Comm. on Commerce, Sci., and
Transp., 107 Cong. 5 (2001) [hereinafter “Carbon Sequestration Hearing”],
(testimony of Heydlauff, Dale E., Senior Vice President for Environmental Affairs,
American Electric Power Company), available at <http://bulk.resource.org/gpo.gov/
hearings/107s/88841.pdf>.

10  FAN Document “The Noel Kempff Mercado Climate Action Project”, page 3. (See

Noel Kempff Reference Documents).

11  Winrock Leakage Analysis, supra note 4, at 28, (“to secure rights to the gains in

carbon arising from [the] 634,286 hectare expansion”) (last visited October 2, 2009);
“Seeing REDD: Reducing Emissions and Conserving Biodiversity by Avoiding
Deforestation, IUCN, UNEP, slide 5. (“Offsets awarded to the Bolivian Government
to be sold on Chicago Climate Exchange”) <http://www.yale.edu/istf/pres08/
peterson.pdf>

12  FAN Bolivia, The Noel Kempff Climate Action Project: Challenges for project based
approaches in future REDD schemes, July 29-August 3, 2007 [powerpoint slides],
at slide 12, retrieved from the BFN website on October 2, 2007, available at <http://
www.bfn.de/ﬁleadmin/MDB/documents/ina/vortraege/22_FAN_Noel_Kempff-
Seifert-Grenzin.pdf>

13  For a further breakdown and chart, see Marshall, S., The Nature Conservancy

Conservation Learning Exchange, Oct. 15, 2008 [powerpoint slides], at slide 46,
retrieved on October 2, 2009 from the Conservation Learning Exchange website,
available at <http://conexmeeting.org/ht/a/GetDocumentAction/i/1927>

14  Data from the Center for Responsive Politics, available at (www.opensecrets.org)
<http://www.opensecrets.org/lobby/indusclient.php?year=2008&lname=E08&id>

15  Data from the Center for Responsive Politics (www.opensecrets.org) <http://www.
opensecrets.org/lobby/clientsum.php?lname=American+Electric+Power&yea
r=2008>

16  Sidley Austin LLP website: <http://www.sidley.com/climatechange/>

17  Van Ness Feldman website: <http://www.vnf.com/practices-41.html>

18  Data from the Center for Responsive Politics (www.opensecrets.org) <http://www.

opensecrets.org/lobby/top.php?showYear=2009&indexType=s>

19  A business association that advocates and lobbies on behalf of shareholder owned
electric company members before Congress, federal and state regulatory agencies,
the courts, and various industry organisations. EEI is also a major investor in
sub-national REDD projects such as Rio Bravo in Brazil. See <http://www.eei.org/
Pages/default.aspx>

20  Data from the Center for Responsive Politics (www.opensecrets.org) <http://www.

opensecrets.org/lobby/top.php?showYear=a&indexType=s>

21  Data from the Center for Responsive Politics (www.opensecrets.org) <http://www.

opensecrets.org/lobby/top.php?showYear=2008&indexType=i>

22  Data from the Center for Responsive Politics (www.opensecrets.org) <http://www.

opensecrets.org/lobby/top.php?showYear=a&indexType=i>

23  For information see: (www.CARMA.org)

24  AEP Corporate Sustainability report, (2009) at 3: <http://www.aep.com/citizenship/

crreport/docs/CS_Report_2009_web.pdf>

25  <http://www.cnn.com/2007/US/law/10/08/pollution.suit.settlement/index.html>

26  The rating applies to sites at which a dam failure would most likely cause loss of

human life, but does not include an assessment of the likelihood of such an event.

27  <http://www.nytimes.com/2009/07/01/science/earth/01ash.html?_r=1&ref=us>

18 CARBON SCAM: Noel Kempff Climate Action Project

28  AEP Corporate Sustainability report, (2009) at 52: <http://www.aep.com/

citizenship/crreport/docs/CS_Report_2009_web.pdf>

29  Data from CARMA (www.CARMA.org)

30  According to data compiled by <http://coalmoney.priceofoil.org>

31  According to data compiled by <http://www.publicintegrity.org/projects/

entry/1182/>

32  BP website: <http://www.bp.com/sectiongenericarticle.do?categoryId=3&contentId

=2006926>

33  BP website: <http://www.bp.com/sectiongenericarticle.do?categoryId=9004510&c

ontentId=7008142>

34  These make up a mere 10% of the company’s global production, BP website:

<http://www.bp.com/sectiongenericarticle.do?categoryId=24&contentId=2000737
>

35  Data from CARMA <http://carma.org/dig/show/world+company#top>

36  BP Sustainability Review (2008) at 6 under “Our Performance: <http://www.

bp.com/liveassets/bp_internet/globalbp/STAGING/global_assets/e_s_assets/e_s_
assets_2008/downloads/bp_sustainability_review_2008.pdf>

37

It reportedly spent $600 million on this rebranding exercise <http://www.
climategreenwash.org/bp>

38  2000: <http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2001/01/ten-worst-

corporations-2000> and 2005 <http://www.multinationalmonitor.org/
mm2005/112005/mokhiber.html>

39  Climate Greenwash <http://www.climategreenwash.org/bp>

40  Slide 74: <http://www.bp.com/liveassets/bp_internet/globalbp/STAGING/global_

assets/downloads/I/IC_bp_strategy_presentation_2008_slides.pdf>

41

Id at side 71:

60  See SGS, Validation and Veriﬁcation Report, Programa Nacional de Cambio
Climatico, Noel Kempff Climate Action Project, Summary, Nov. 27, 2005
[hereinafter “SGS Validation Report Summary”], at 7, available at <http://portals.
wi.wur.nl/ﬁles/docs/ﬁle/REDD%20bossen%20klimaat/Bolivia%20case-%20
Carbon%20Certif%20SGS.pdf>

SGS is one of the world’s largest auditors of “clean” energy and offset projects and
is accredited under the Kyoto Protocol’s Clean Development Mechanism (CDM).
As of the second week in September 2009, SGS had its accreditation suspended
by United Nations inspectors, after failing spot checks due to shortcomings in its
veriﬁcation procedures. SGS “was unable to prove its staff had properly vetted
projects that were then approved for the carbon-trading scheme, or even that they
were qualiﬁed to do so.” Danny Fortson, Georgia Warren, Carbon-trading market
hit as UN suspends clean-energy auditor, The Sunday Times, Sept. 13, 2009,
available at <http://business.timesonline.co.uk/tol/business/industry_sectors/
natural_resources/article6832259.ece>

61  See Noel Kempff website: “[T]he investors are seeking an investment return on
capital through the use or sale of carbon offset credits generated.” <http://www.
noelkempff.com/English/Weinstein.htm>; “The NKCAP partners have found that
access to the carbon market is critical for the long-term ﬁnancial sustainability of
the NKCAP and the long-term provision of climate, community and biodiversity
beneﬁts.” TNC Submission to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change regarding Reducing Emissions from Deforestation in Developing
Countries (Feb. 23, 2007), FCCC/SBSTA/2006/L.25 [hereinafter “TNC RED
Submission”], at 4 , available at <http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/2007/smsn/
ngo/008.pdf>; “The expectation is that the credits will become marketable on
commodity exchanges in the next few years, although no trading structure
yet exists. When this happens, the companies may realise a tidy proﬁt,” Ingrid
Roerhorst, Potential ﬁnancial instruments for PAN Parks – Examples and Ideas,
Oct. 2000 [hereinafter “Roerhorst”], at 5, available at <http://74.125.77.132/
search?q=cache:SfVoAfK_obAJ:www.panparks.org/index.php%3Fname%3DOE-
DocManager%26ﬁle%3Ddownload%26id%3D1963%26keret%3DN%26show
header%3DN+%22some+of+the+cheapest+credits+the+world+will+ever+kno
w%22&cd=1&hl=en&ct=clnk&gl=uk>

42  Described as such by the Center for Responsive Politics (www.opensecrests.org)

62

<http://www.opensecrets.org/orgs/list.php>

43  Data from the Center for Responsive Politics (www.opensecrets.org) <http://www.

opensecrets.org/lobby/clientsum.php?year=2008&lname=BP&id>

44  Data from the Center for Responsive Politics (www.opensecrets.org) <http://www.
opensecrets.org/lobby/clientsum.php?lname=American+Petroleum+Institute&yea
r=2008>

45

“Forbes, AFX News Limited, Scottish Power sells Paciﬁcorp to Warren Buffet for
9.4 billion USD” (24 May 2005) <http://www.forbes.com/feeds/afx/2005/05/24/
afx2049995.html>

46  <http://www.midamerican.com/subsidiaries1.aspx>

47  Data from CARMA (www.CARMA.org)

48  Data from CARMA <http://carma.org/dig/show/world+company#top>

49  <http://www.paciﬁcpower.net/File/File58241.pdf>

50  <http://www.paciﬁcpower.net/File/File58241.pdf>

51  <http://www.paciﬁcpower.net/File/File58241.pdf>

52  Data from CARMA (www.CARMA.org)

53  Public News Service, “WYO Power Plant Pollution Suit - Push Coming to (Legal)
Shove” (21 February 2007.) <http://www.publicnewsservice.org/index.php?/
content/article/1613-1>

54  Environmental News Service, “Electrocuting Eagles Costs Paciﬁcorp $10.5 Million”
(14 July 2009) <http://www.ens-newswire.com/ens/jul2009/2009-07-14-092.asp>

55  Center for Responsive Politics (www.opensecrets.org)

56

Id.

57  <http://www.paciﬁcorp.com/Navigation/Navigation3883.html>

58  Data from CARMA (www.CARMA.org)

59  S. Prt. 109-27, Appendix H, Information Re: Emission Credits, at 444 (2005),

available at <http://www.gpo.gov/congress/senate/pdf/109cp/21035/appendix-H.
pdf>

“Accounting for early action is essential,” Bruce Braine, AEP’s Perspective on GHG
Accounting, July 23, 2002 [powerpoint slides][hereinafter “Brain GHG Accounting
Presentation”], at slide 18, available at <http://www.merid.org/GHGaccounting/
docs/Braine,%20AEPs%20Perspective%20on%20GHG%20Accounting.pdf>; AEP
is pushing to see “credit for early action” included in a cap and trade system within
the United States. This may see projects like Noel Kempff included retrospectively
— if the system permits such actions. See Avoided Deforestation Partners, Tropical
Forest-Climate Unity Agreement, Consensus Principles on International Forests
for US Climate Legislation, May 12, 2009, at principle 10 and Appendix I at 2 and
4, available at <http://adpartners.org/pdf/ADP%20Forest-Climate%20Unity%20
Agreement-%205-18-09.pdf>

63  Meeks Testimony, supra note 1.

64  The Eliasch Review, Climate Change: Financing Global Forests (2008) [hereinafter
“Eliasch Review”], at 155, available at <http://www.illegal-logging.info/uploads/
Fullreporteliaschreview1.pdf>

65  The Voluntary Carbon Offset Market Inquiry, Submission to the House of

Commons Environmental Audit Committee, Memorandum by Sustainable Forestry
Management, Ltd. [hereinafter “SFM Submission”], at 13, available at <http://
www.4apes.com/carbon/downloads/SFM-EAC-Voluntary-Carbon-Market-Inquiry.
pdf>

66  This was a pilot program initiated in 1994 by the United States designed to

evaluate different approaches to reducing emissions of greenhouse gases, and
which encourages organisations in the United States (mainly private sector ﬁrms)
and other countries to form partnerships to implement projects that mitigate
greenhouse gas emissions and promote sustainable development. See USIJI
website, <http://www.gcrio.org/usiji/index.html>. NKCAP is included on the list
of current USIJI projects. <http://www.gcrio.org/usiji/projects/CurrentProjs.html>.
See also GAO Report, Climate Change: Information on the US Initiative on Joint
Implementation, RCED-98-154 (June 29, 1998), available at <http://www.gao.gov/
products/RCED-98-154>

67  This is a programme under the UNFCCC that allows for the joint implementation of

greenhouse gas mitigation projects by developed countries (and their companies)
and developed/developing countries (and their companies). AIJ was intended to
allow Parties to gain experience in jointly implemented project activities pursuant to
Article 4.2(a) of the UNFCCC. See USIJI Uniform Reporting Document: Activities
Implemented Jointly Under the Pilot Phase, Noel Kempff Climate Action Project
[hereinafter “USIJI Uniform Reporting Document”], available at <http://www.gcrio.
org/usiji/pdf/Bolivia-1%203-05.pdf>

CARBON SCAM: Noel Kempff Climate Action Project

19

68  Forestry in the CDM permits only project level afforestation and reforestation
activities. Decision 5/CMP.1, Modalities and procedures for afforestation and
reforestation project activities under the clean development mechanism in the ﬁrst
commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol, FCCC/KP/CMP/2005/8/Add.1, available
at <http://cdm.unfccc.int/Reference/COPMOP/08a01.pdf#page=6>; SGS,
itself a designated operational entity for validating CDM projects, carried out an
assessment of the project to validate and verify its CO2 beneﬁts in 2005. It afﬁrmed,
“It has to be emphasised that [NKCAP] does not constitute an eligible activity under
the CDM – which only allows for afforestation and reforestation — and, therefore,
will not generate certiﬁed emissions reductions (CER) as recognised under the
Kyoto Protocol.” SGS Validation Report Summary, supra note 60, at 4.

69  The award was established at Harvard University to recognise outstanding effort by
public and private sector organisations working together to protect the environment
or preserve uniquely valuable natural resources. See Belfer Center, Kennedy
School of Government, Harvard University website, <http://belfercenter.ksg.
harvard.edu/project/43/environment_and_natural_resources.html?page_id=16>
According to the AEP press release, NKCAP was recognised as a “prime example
of how governments, non-governmental organisations and private companies
can cooperate to promote sustainable development with lasting beneﬁts for
local communities and the global environment.” Press Release, AEP carbon
sequestration project recognised by Harvard University (April 4, 2003), available
at <http://www.aep.com/Newsroom/newsreleases/?id=1010>; Press Release,
Kennedy School Bestows Inaugural Roy Family Award to Bolivia-US Public-Private
Partnership (March 25, 2003), available at : <http://belfercenter.ksg.harvard.edu/
publication/3604/kennedy_school_bestows_inaugural_roy_family_award_to_
boliviaus_publicprivate_partnership.html>

70  Hearing Before S. Comm. on Agriculture, Nutrition and Forestry, 107th Cong.
March 29, 2001 (testimony of Gary Kaster, Manager, Forestry and Recreation
Programmes, American Electric Power) [hereinafter “Kaster Testimony”], available at
<http://agriculture.senate.gov/Hearings/Hearings_2001/March_29__2001/0329kas.
htm>

71  SGS Validation Report Summary, supra note 60, at 12.

72  Real reductions are those that are easily measurable, reportable, and veriﬁable.

Leakage (emissions displacement) refers to forest destruction halted in one part of a
country being moved to another part or across an international border. Additionality
refers to the need to prove that compensated reductions would not have occurred
in the absence of the rewarded activity. Permanence refers to the need for emission
reductions to be permanent, not temporary. This is especially problematic for forest
carbon offsets due to the possible release of the carbon stored or sequestered as
a result of the project activity (i.e., avoided deforestation) that may occur as a result
of human or natural disturbances (ﬁres, disease, pests or even climate change).
A major issue with permanence is who should be liable (buyer, seller, joint, other)
in the event that the forest is later destroyed. Any approach to REDD will have
to deal with the signiﬁcant problems of leakage, permanence (and liability), and
baseline-setting. However, these issues are especially problematic in the case of
market offset mechanisms that allow energy and industrial emissions to increase if
“equivalent” reductions in forest emissions are made. For example, under a market
offset mechanism, if a country’s baseline is incorrectly established, it could end up
generating non-additional reductions — i.e. “fake” emission reduction credits (or
“hot air”) — and allow an industrialised country to increase its emissions. The result
is that the market offset mechanism could lead to an increase in global greenhouse
gas emissions.

73  The Tropical Forest Protection Act, Hearing on H.R. 2870 Before the H. Comm.

on Int’l Relations, 105th Cong. 42 (1998) (statement of Tia Nelson, The Nature
Conservancy), available at <http://commdocs.house.gov/committees/intlrel/
hfa48783.000/hfa48783_0f.htm>; Hearing before the S. Env’t and Public Works
Comm., (March 24, 1999), (statement of Tia Nelson, The Nature Conservancy)
available at <http://epw.senate.gov/107th/nel_3-24.htm>; Kaster Testimony, supra
note 70; Carbon Sequestration Hearing, supra note 9, testimony of Dale Heydlauff,
AEP; testimony of John Kadyszewski, Winrock International; prepared statement
of Mike Coda, Director, Climate Change Program, the Nature Conservancy; FAN
Submission on reducing emission from deforestation in developing countries:
approaches to stimulate action, at 7 (FCCC/CP/2005/L.2), available at <http://
unfccc.int/resource/docs/2006/smsn/ngo/008.pdf>; SFM Submission, supra note
65, at 13; TNC RED Submission, supra note 61, at 2-4; Emerging Technologies
and Practices for Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions, Hearing before the S.
Env’t and Public Works Comm., Subcomm. on Private Sector and Consumer
Solutions to Global Warming and Wildlife Protection, 107 Cong., May 9, 2007
(testimony of Michael W. Rencheck, AEP), available at <http://epw.senate.gov/
public/index.cfm?FuseAction=Files.View&FileStore_id=0ec52e8e-4657-4612-816c-
ee25a0552058>; Meeks Testimony, supra note 1..

74  Estimated carbon emissions reductions from NKCAP (1996-2009) (Carbon to CO2

ratio taken as 1:3.67.)

[1996] - 14.5 million tonnes of carbon (equals 53.2 million tonnes of CO2 over
30 years), Ecological Enterprises, Bolivian Forests to Offset Greenhouse Gas
Emissions, (Dec. 9, 1996) available at <http://ces.iisc.ernet.in/hpg/envis/
boldoc1210.html>;

[1997] - 18 million tonnes of carbon (equals 66 million tonnes of CO2 over 30
years), Republic of Bolivia Ministry of Sustainable Development and Planning, et
al., National Strategy Study for the Participation of Bolivia in the CDM, Executive
Summary (May 2001) (hereinafter “Bolivia CDM Strategy”), at 31, available at
<http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/boladd3.pdf>;

[1998] - 15.8 million tonnes of carbon (equals 57.9 million tonnes of CO2 over
30 years), <http://www.luxner.com/cgi-bin/view_article.cgi?articleID=849>;
<http://rainforests.mongabay.com/10noel.htm>; <http://forests.org/archive/
samerica/doubsize.htm>; AEP Practices Energized Environmental Stewardships,
PRNewswire article, (21 April 1998) (See Noel Kempff Reference Documents)

[1999] - 15 million tonnes of carbon (equals 55 million tonnes of CO2 over 30 years),
Hearing on Voluntary Activities to Reduce the Emission of Greenhouse Gases
Before Senate Comm. on Env’t and Public Works, 107th Cong. (March 24, 1999)
(statement of Tia Nelson, Deputy Director, Climate Change Programme, The Nature
Conservancy), , available at <http://epw.senate.gov/107th/nel_3-24.htm> and
USIJI Uniform Reporting Document, supra note 22;

[2001] - 7 million tonnes of carbon (equals 25.7 million tonnes of CO2 over 30 years)
National Energy Technology Laboratory (May 14, 2001). Forest Conservation and
Restoration as a Response to Climate Change [Powerpoint presentation], at slide
14, retrieved from Dep’t of Energy website on Oct. 2, 2009, available at <http://
www.netl.doe.gov/publications/proceedings/01/carbon_seq/ps1c.pdf>;

[2001] - 14 million tonnes of carbon (equals 51.3 million tonnes of CO2 over 30
years), Carbon Sequestration Hearings, supra note 9, Heydlauff testimony;

[2001] - 5.6 to 7.1 million tonnes of carbon (equals 20.5 to 26 million tonnes CO2
over 30 years), Bolivia CDM Strategy, see above, at 31;

[2003] - 6 to 8 million tonnes of carbon (equals 18 to 24 million tonnes CO2 over 30
years), retrieved from TNC 2003 website on Bolivia Program, Noel Kempff Mercado
National Park <http://web.archive.org/web/20031004054159/http:/nature.org/
wherewework/southamerica/bolivia/work/art11035.html>;

[2004] - 4.5 million tonnes of carbon (equals 16.5 million tonnes of CO2
over 30 years), retrieved from TNC 2004 webpage on Bolivia Program,
Noel Kempff Mercado National Park, available at <http://web.archive.org/
web/20040430180205/http:/nature.org/wherewework/southamerica/bolivia/work/
art11035.html>;

[2007] - Up to 1.6 million tonnes carbon (equals 5.8 million tonnes of CO2 over 30
years), retrieved from TNC 2007 webpage on Noel Kempff <http://web.archive.org/
web/20071017122136rn_1/www.nature.org/wherewework/southamerica/bolivia/
work/art11035.html>

[Today] - Still no ﬁxed ﬁgure: “up to 5.8 million tonnes of carbon dioxide” (equals
1.6 million tonnes of carbon over 30 years), TNC 2009 website on Bolivia Noel
Kempff Mercado National Park, available at <http://www.nature.org/wherewework/
southamerica/bolivia/work/art11035.html>

75  UNFCCC AIJ Report for NKCAP, Section E.3, available at <http://unfccc.int/
kyoto_mechanisms/aij/activities_implemented_jointly/items/1890.php>

76  SGS, Validation Summary Report, supra note 60, at 16.

77  TNC webpage for Bolivia Program Noel Kempff Mercado National Park (see section
entitled “What the Conservancy is Doing”), available at <http://www.nature.org/
wherewework/southamerica/bolivia/work/art11035.html; > and B., Virgilio, N.,
Noel Kempff Case Study: Capturing Carbon Finance, [hereinafter “Noel Kempff
Case Study”] at 2, available at: <http://www.worldwildlife.org/science/pubs/
CommissionedPapers/Stanley,%20B._%20Noel%20Kempff%20Case%20Study.
pdf>.

78  A/R CDM Project Design Documents for the Noel Kempff Climate Action Project
(PDD_v02.03), May 17, 2006 [hereinafter “NKCAP PDD”], at 119, available at
<http://conserveonline.org/workspaces/climate.change/ClimateActionProjects/
NoelKempff/NKPDD>

79  See e.g. UN Food and Agricultural Organisation (FAO) Global Forest Resources

Assessment 2005.

20 CARBON SCAM: Noel Kempff Climate Action Project

80  NKCAP PDD supra note 78 at 48-50, and 129. The projected baseline will be
“adapted” in the future if deforestation in the reference area “proves to become
exponentially.” There is little justiﬁcation for the identiﬁcation and use of this
reference area, other than the statement: “The reference area may differ in size and
socio-economic conditions of the project area as long as it is in the same region
and reﬂects the overall trend of the area.” Id. at 118.

99

81

Id. at 23.

82  NKCAP PDD supra note 78 at 48-50, and 129. The projected baseline will be
“adapted” in the future if deforestation in the reference area “proves to become
exponentially.” There is little justiﬁcation for the identiﬁcation and use of this
reference area, other than the statement: “The reference area may differ in size and
socio-economic conditions of the project area as long as it is in the same region
and reﬂects the overall trend of the area.” Id. at 118.

83  Schmidt, C., Green Trees for Greenhouse Gases: A Fair Trade-Off?, 109 Env’l

Health Perspectives (No. 3) (March 2001), at A 126 (quoting Dale Heydlauff, Vice
President for Environmental Affairs, AEP), available at <http://www.ehponline.org/
docs/2001/109-3/spheres.pdf>

84  Winrock Leakage Analysis, supra note 4, at 27.

85  Eliasch Review supra note 64, at 113.

86  Acosta, M., Sohngen, B., How big is leakage from forestry carbon credits?

Estimates from a global model, Ohio State University (2009), at 6, available at
<http://ageconsearch.umn.edu/bitstream/49468/2/How%20big%20is%20
leakage%20from%20forestry%20carbon%20credits-AAEA-Submission613055.
pdf>

87  Beane, J., et al., Forest Carbon Offsets: A Scorecard for Evaluating Project Quality
(Nov. 2008), at 2, available at <http://www.manometmaine.org/documents/
ForestCarbonScorecard.pdf>

88  NKCAP PDD, supra note 78, at 50-51, 71-72.

89  TNC RED Submission, supra note 61, at 3. <http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/2007/

smsn/ngo/008.pdf>

90  Meeks Testimony, supra note 1, at 7.

91  Winrock Leakage Analysis, supra note 4, at 28-29.

92

“The establishment of the NKCAP is averting land conversion activities from
taking place and therefore creating a risk of ‘activity shifting’ or ‘primary’ leakage
from [sic] occurring. The existing leakage prevention activities of the NKCAP are
focused on the land conversion activities of the few communities surrounding the
park boundary.” Id. at 7. This study also establishes that, “in terms of identifying
and tracking potential leakage, we felt that understanding the baseline drivers
and agents was crucial, thus focusing activities on speciﬁc groups of people
rather than on the broader issues and geographical statistics,” id. at 27, and that
in Noel Kempff, “this people based approach is the focus of the existing leakage
prevention activities, for example providing alternative livelihood beneﬁts for local
communities.” Id.

93

Id. at 28-29. The same study later describes secondary leakage as where “other
concessionaires take advantage of the ‘hole’ in timber supply caused by a
reduction in concession area by increasing their own production.” Id. at 31.

94

Id. at 7, 20.

95

“In the few years since the establishment of the NKCAP, the largest threat of
leakage associated with land conversion is from the communities living on the
border of the park.” Id. at 20. “The establishment of the NKCAP is averting land
conversion activities from taking place and therefore creating a risk of ‘activity
shifting’ or ‘primary’ leakage . . . .” Id. at 7.

96  Noel Kempff Climate Action Project, Project Design Documents (PDD_v02.03)

p.118 and 129

97

Id. at 27. See also id. at 7, 20.

98  Brown Leakage Report, supra note 2, at 7-8, 15. ; Winrock Leakage Analysis,

supra note 4, at 7, 23, 28. (Compare “These data show an increase in the average
carbon loss per year since the establishment of the NKCAP when compared with
the situation before the project,” with “There is no evidence to suggest that there
has been any leakage to date as a result of the averted and conversion activities.”
Id. at 21 and 28 respectively.)

“The most important risk of leakage is when communities continue to deforest at
the same rate as before with the only difference that the deforestation is taking
place outside the project area instead of inside. The area that could possibly be
considered leakage is monitored in the buffer zone: a 15km wide strip next to the
project area,” SGS Validation Report Summary, supra note 60, at 11.; The Noel
Kempff Climate Action Project, Project Design Documents back up this focus on
leakage being caused by local communities. According to the documents, “[t]he
buffer zone is the area of possible leakage. Leakage occurs when communities
continue to deforest at the same rate as before the implementation of the project
with the only difference that the deforestation is taking place outside the project
area instead of inside.” NKCAP PDD, supra note 78, at 118, 129.

100  NKPDD Appendix A, at 13, Annex 6 at 17, PDD at 4; Winrock Leakage Analysis,

supra note 4, at 7, 23.

101  See generally, Leakage from an Avoided Deforestation Compensation Policy:

Concepts, Empirical Evidence, and Corrective Policy Options, Brian C. Murray,
Nicholas Institute for Environmental Policy Solutions, Duke University, NI WP 08-02
(June 2008); Estimating Leakage From Forest Carbon Sequestration Programs, by
Brian C. Murray et al, Working Paper 02_06 (May 2002, RTI International).

102  See generally Helmut Geist & Eric Lambin, What Drives Tropical Deforestation?

A Meta-Analysis of Proximate and Underlying Causes of Deforestation Based on
Subnational Case Study Evidence (LUCC Report Series No. 4, Louvain-la-Neuve
2001); see also U.K. House of Commons, Environmental Audit Committee,
Reducing greenhouse gas emissions from deforestation: No hope without forests
(16 June 2009), at <http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200809/
cmselect/cmenvaud/30/3002.htm>

103  NKCAP PDD, supra note 78, at 118, 129.

104  Id. at 118, 119 (map of areas), and 129 (stating that leakage from communities
is only monitored in three areas: “the project area, a buffer zone and a reference
area.”); Brown, S., and Sohngen, B., Measuring Leakage from Carbon Projects
in Open Economies: A Stop Timber Harvesting Project in Bolivia as a Case
Study, 34 Canadian Journal of Forest Research 829, 830 (2004) [hereinafter
“Brown Case Study”] , available at <http://article.pubs.nrc-cnrc.gc.ca/RPAS/
rpv?hm=HInit&afpf=x03-249.pdf&journal=cjfr&volume=34>

105  NKCAP PDD, supra note 78, at 60.

106  Id. at .118, 129.

107  NKCAP PDD, supra note 33, at.118 (119 (map of areas) and 129 (stating that
leakage from communities is only monitored in three areas: “the project area, a
buffer zone and a reference area.”); Brown Case Study, supra note 104 at 830.

108  Brown Leakage Report, supra note 2, at 14. The document indicates that leakage
will not be considered if it enters into “any areas with some form of legal title or
protection,” even though the atmosphere does not discriminate between leakage
that encroaches onto titled or non-titled land.

109  SGS Validation Report Summary, supra note 60, at 4 (italics added). The initial

assessment in 2004 found two major “Corrective Action Requests” (the occurrence
of a single major CAR precludes veriﬁcation and validation). One of the major CARs
related to the socio-economic aspects of the project. Id. at 5.

110  Id. at 13 (ﬁnding that “unsustainable logging” practices had occurred as late

as 2004 despite being undertaken “in the context of a sustainable community
development programme.”)

111  Carbon-trading market hit by UN suspension of clean-energy auditor, The Times,
Danny Fortson, Georgia Warren (13 Sept. 2009). (“The legitimacy of the $100
billion (£60 billion) carbon-trading market has been called into question after
the world’s largest auditor of clean-energy projects was suspended by United
Nations inspectors. SGS UK had its accreditation suspended last week after it was
unable to prove its staff had properly vetted projects that were then approved for
the carbon-trading scheme, or even that they were qualiﬁed to do so.”); Carbon
market under ﬁre as UN suspends British CDM project accreditor (James Murray,
BusinessGreen, 14 Sep 2009).

112  This was against the terms of their contracts that they signed with the project’s

partners, which required them to utilise this new practice in any future logging
operations.

113  The concession is located next to a road that runs alongside the buffer zone to Piso

Firme, halfway between Florida and Porvenir.

114  Interview on ﬁle with author. For details on the new law, see section on

“additionality.”

CARBON SCAM: Noel Kempff Climate Action Project

21

115  A governmental body in charge of approving and monitoring sustainable forestry
management practices as well as monitoring deforestation in general, both legal
and illegally. We were told by a local engineer of the San Ignacio municipality that
today, this is a non-functioning aspect of the body.

116  A governmental programme to encourage colonisation of the lowlands. Interview on

ﬁle with author.

117  Brown Case Study, supra note 104, at 830.

118  Id.; Winrock Leakage Analysis, supra note 4, at 39-40. According to this report,
this activity “would likely have been undertaken regardless,” which is perplexing
given that it was apparently ﬁnanced with funds provided by the project investors
and in any event may explain their behaviour but fails to deal with the atmospheric
consequences of the act on the project’s overall emission reductions. The same
study goes on to state that “Given the difﬁculties associated with collecting data to
estimate leakage directly, and given the large changes in the structure of Bolivian
forestry after the new law in 1996, this report will rely on a timber harvesting model
that has been developed for Bolivia.” Id. at 32.

119  Winrock Leakage Analysis, supra note 4, at p. 39.

120  Meeks Testimony, supra note 1.

121  Brown Leakage Report, supra note 2, at p.13.

122  “Over the longer term, it is likely that other sources of threats to the project area

may become apparent…and therefore constitutes another source of potential
leakage. In particular, this may be from the sporadic colonisation of the area, or
from the approach of the agricultural frontier. A number of methods are proposed
for trying to analyse, track and quantify this longer-term leakage.” Brown Case
Study, supra note 104, at 7. “Predicting the extent of leakage that might occur
in the longer term is a difﬁcult exercise given the range of factors that may affect
land use change outside of the project area, many of which may be unrelated to
the project itself.” Id. at 24. “Given the difﬁculties associated with collecting data to
estimate leakage directly, and given the large changes in the structure of Bolivian
forestry after the new law in 1996, this report will rely on a timber harvesting model
that has been developed for Bolivia” and therefore not ground based monitoring
and remote sensing. Winrock Leakage Analysis, supra note 4, at 32.

123  NKCAP PDD, supra note 78, at 129-130.

124  Id.

125  Id. (citing Methodological Issues, Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry:

Deﬁnitions and Modalities for Including Afforestation and Reforestation Activities
Under Article 12 of the Kyoto Protocol (FCCC/SBSTA/2003/L.27), Annex 1(e) at
5) (“leakage is the increase in greenhouse gas emissions by sources which occurs
outside the boundary of an afforestation or reforestation project activity under the
CDM which is measurable and attributable to the afforestation or reforestation
project activity.”). The Project Design Documents cite a UNFCCC deﬁnition of
leakage, which it is claimed, lends support to its determination (although the
deﬁnition on its face does not establish any speciﬁc baseline for determining
whether or not an increase in leakage has occurred)

126  Winrock Leakage Analysis, supra note 4, at 30, 40.

127  NKCAP PDD, supra note 78, at 128; Annex 2, at 16. . Since the dynamic

optimisation model “simulates the whole timber production of Bolivia,” the project
design document argues that “it is reasonable to state, that this speciﬁc form of
leakage is implicitly included in the calculation.”

128  Winrock Leakage Analysis, supra note 4, at 39-40.

129  Id.; NKCAP PDD, supra note 78, at 128.

130  Noel Kempff Climate Action Project, Project Design Documents (PDD_v02.03)

p.127-8 (footnote 27), p.131 and p.142-3

131  Noel Kempff Climate Action Project, Project Design Documents (PDD_v02.03)

p.127-8 (footnote 27), p.131 and p.142-3

136  NKCAP PDD, supra note 78, at 71.

137  1996 National Forestry Law (Ley Forestal No. 1700).

138  Winrock Leakage Analysis, supra note 4, at 43. “[T]here would be substantial

difﬁculties with separating the inﬂuences of the NKCAP from the dramatic changes
in Bolivian forestry law that occurred in 1996. The law changed the way that
concessions were granted, and the fee structure. One clear effect was a 75%
reduction in the area of land under concession, from 22.5 million hectares in
1995 to 5.7 million hectares in 1997.” Id. at 31. “[A]vailable data suggests that
concession area declined dramatically (75% country-wide) after the change in
timber law. Thus, it is difﬁcult to assess fully the potential impact of the change
in Bolivian timber law in 1996 on Bolivian timber market structure, and more
speciﬁcally, on the concessions indemniﬁed. Such information would be crucial
for understanding the baseline harvests from the area indemniﬁed, since both the
change in law and the indemniﬁcation occurred at the same time. As discussed
below, additional data collection could provide more information on the effects of
the change in law in 1996, and the indemniﬁcation.” Id. at 43.

139  Id. at 31-32.

140  The UN Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) data (Global Forest Resources
Assessment (2005) and the State of the World’s Forests (2005, 2003, 2001))
reports that between 1990-2000 annual percentage change in Bolivia’s forest cover
was -0.43%, and between 2000-2005, annual percentage change was -0.45%.
Between 1990-2005, total percentage change in Bolivia’s land cover was -6.46%.
Available here <http://rainforests.mongabay.com/deforestation/2000/Bolivia.htm>

141  FRA (2005) (Global Forest Resource Assessment). UN Food and Agricultural

Organisation (FAO), Rome, Italy. ESRI, GIS for Climate Change, Conserving Bolivia’s
Critical Resources, November 2008, p.7-8.

142  See e.g. UN Food and Agricultural Organisation (FAO) Global Forest Resources

Assessment 2005.

143  The European Union is calling on a halt to global forest cover loss by 2030 at the
latest. See European Council Conclusions on the further development of the EU
position on a comprehensive post-2012 climate agreement (2 March 2009). Major
NGOs have called for such action with Greenpeace calling to halt global gross
deforestation by 2020 (with priority areas such as the Amazon protected by 2015);
and WWF calling to halt global net deforestation by 2020.

144  Chris Lang, The insurance industry on carbon stored in forests: “It’s a regulatory

asset.”, Dec. 10, 2008, retrieved from REDD-Monitor website, available at <http://
www.redd-monitor.org/2008/12/10/the-insurance-industry-on-carbon-stored-in-
forests/>

145  FAN Submission on reducing emission from deforestation in developing countries:
approaches to stimulate action (FCCC/CP/2005/L.2)[hereinafter “FAN REDD
Submission”], at 7, available at <http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/2006/smsn/
ngo/008.pdf>.

146  R-PIN is the acronym for “Readiness Plan Idea Note”. It is a document that

governments participating in the World Bank’s Forest Carbon Partnership Facility
(FCPF) must produce in order to receive funding. The FCPF is a mechanism
to ﬁnance REDD activities in developing countries under the auspices of
the World Bank. See <http://www.forestcarbonpartnership.org/fcp/sites/
forestcarbonpartnership.org/ﬁles/Bolivia_R_PIN_Annex_II_Country_Experience.pdf>

147  FAN REDD Submission, supra note 145, at 1; FCPC R-PIN - Annex II, Bolivia:

Country Experiences, at 2, available at <http://www.forestcarbonpartnership.
org/fcp/sites/forestcarbonpartnership.org/ﬁles/Bolivia_R_PIN_Annex_II_Country_
Experience.pdf>

148  And the immense difﬁculties with which these changes can be measured and

accounted for. The current 2006 IPCC Guidelines for Greenhouse Gas Inventories
suggest a 60% uncertainty rate on reporting changes in carbon stocks. 2006 IPCC
Guidelines for Greenhouse Gas Inventories (Simon Eggelston, et al., eds., 2006)
[hereinafter “2006 IPPC GHG Inventory Guidelines”], available at <http://www.ipcc-
nggip.iges.or.jp/public/2006gl/index.html>

132  Noel Kempff Climate Action Project, Project Design Documents (PDD_v02.03)

p.128

149  This is recognised by Noel Kempff’s partners, see, e.g., Noel Kempff Case Study,

supra note 77, at 4.

133  Ross W. Gorte and Jonathan L. Ramseur, Congr. Research Serv., Report for

Congress, Forest Carbon Markets: Potential and Drawbacks, July 3, 2008, at 18,
available at <http://ncseonline.org/NLE/CRSreports/08Aug/RL34560.pdf>.

134  Interview held on ﬁle with author.

150  The interest from this fund is designed to guarantee that ﬁnance will never run out.

151  The discount factor was used to account for anthropogenic ﬁres only. Biomass

carbon stocks of all types of forest were reduced by 5% to supposedly cover this
risk. SGS Validation Report Summary, supra note 60, at 11.

135  FAN Document “The Noel Kempff Mercado Climate Action Project”, page 8. (See

Noel Kempff Reference Documents)

152  Winrock Leakage Analysis, supra note 4, at 7.

22 CARBON SCAM: Noel Kempff Climate Action Project

153  NKCAP PDD, supra note 78, at 127-28, note 27, 131, and 142-43.

173  Carbon Sequestration Hearing, supra note 9, Heydlauff testimony at 6. FAN also

154  Id.

155  Victor Hugo Vela, indigenous peoples representative of the Chiquotano tribe and
head of the Coordinating Body of Indigenous Organisations of Bolivia, speaking
at a side event on REDD at the UNFCCC talks in Poznan, Poland, Feb 2009, as
reported here: <http://thestar.com.my/lifestyle/story.asp?ﬁle=/2009/2/3/lifefocus/29
47516&sec=lifefocus>

156  NKCAP PDD, supra note 78, at 168.

157  Id.

158  Id. at 4 and 12 (Central Indigena de Bajo Paragua (CIBAPA) is a group that

represents the local communities surrounding the Project. It was created during
the NK project process to represent the four key communities affected (Porvenir,
Florida, Piso Firme and Cachuela). Its goals include using the land-title process to
ensure that proceeds from future forestry activities are disbursed at community
level. CIBAPA consists of a president and a vice-president elected by the
communities every ﬁve years.)

159  SERNAP (Servicio Nacional de Areas Protegidas), or Bolivian Protected Areas

National Service, is directly responsible for the management of about 20 national
protected areas and supervises the overall system.

160  “Major CARs [corrective action requests] preclude certiﬁcation . . . . One of the two
major CARs related to the socio-economic aspects of the project.” SGS Validation
Report Summary, supra note 60, at 5.

asserts that the project has provided the local communities with services such
as schools, diesel, road maintenance, medical centers, portable water facilities,
electricity, etc., but they also admit that many of the projects failed. One local
community member told us that “the NK project has not helped us to construct the
community’s [Florida] school, medical centre and the portable water, or maintained
the road coming into Florida. This was done by the municipal in San Ignacio. The
NK project only helped [through FAN] with refurbishing the roof of the school, that is
all.” Interview held on ﬁle with author.

174  Interview held on ﬁle with author. Although ecotourism ventures were started

and two lodges were built as part of the project’s implementation of community
beneﬁts, they are rarely used after FAN lost its administrative responsibilities in
2006. Very few tourists have used the facilities since, and many buildings and roads
have fallen into disrepair and are badly in need of maintenance. Interview on ﬁle
with author.

175  The community members and park guards we spoke to were of this opinion.

Interviews on ﬁle with author.

176  Interviews on ﬁle with author.

177  Carbon Sequestration Hearing, supra note 9, Heydlauff testimony at 6.

178  See Noel Kempff website <http//:www.noelkempff.com/English/Ecotourism.htm>

179  Video footage on ﬁle with author.

180  Carbon Sequestration Hearing, supra note 9, Heydlauff testimony at 6.

161  NKCAP PDD, supra note 78, at Annex 6, Livelihood impact assessment: Noel

181  See Noel Kempff website <http://www.noelkempff.com/English/Weinstein.htm>

Kempff Climate Action Project (NK-CAP) Bolivia, Final Report, November 2005, at
23.

162  This is a local forum set up at the start of the Project which is comprised of the local
municipality, CIBAPA, FAN, SERNAP, project managers, community leaders etc
who meet to discuss issues relating to Noel Kempff.

163  Twenty-six % of the government’s ownership of 49% of the rights to carbon credits

were supposed to be reinvested back into the Project.

164  Meeks Testimony, supra note 1, at 7.

165  Carbon Sequestration Hearing, supra note 9, Heydlauff testimony, at 6. This
assertion is maintained today. See Meeks Testimony, supra note 1, at 7.

166  Braine Forest Project Experiences Presentation, supra note 6, at slide 8.

167  Central Indigena de Bajo Paragua (CIBAPA) is a group that represents the local

communities surrounding the Project. It was created during the NK project process
to represent the four key communities affected (Porvenir, Florida, Piso Firme and
Cachuela). Its goals include using the land-title process to ensure that proceeds
from future forestry activities are disbursed at community level. CIBAPA consists of
a president and a vice-president elected by the communities every ﬁve years.

168  Interview on ﬁle with author. The indigenous territory Bajo Paraguá (TCO) refers to

the area where the local communities applied for and subsequently obtained title to
land and property rights therein, with assistance from FAN.

169  Interview on ﬁle with author. Further, an article written in 2002 claims that at least
in the short term, certain sections of the local communities are ﬁnancially poorer.
See Nigel M. Asquith, et al., Can forest-protection carbon projects improve rural
livelihoods? Analysis of the Noel Kempff Mercado climate action project, Bolivia,
7 Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change (Number 4), December
2002, at 323 <http://www.naturabolivia.org/Informacion/Vargas.pdf>”

170  During FAN’s 10-year oversight of Noel Kempff it managed two separate

investments of $850,000, both 5 years apart, which were to provide alternate
livelihoods and capacity building for the local communities. FAN created a
programme called APOCOM (Apoyo Comunitario) in the ﬁrst ﬁve year period,
which was designed to provide services to the communities such as alternative
livelihoods. The second $850,000 investment over the next ﬁve year period
was also invested through the APOCOM (renamed “Programa de Desarrollo
Comunitario” or PRODECOM) programme supposedly towards capacity building,
administration, and technical support.

182  See Canopy Botanicals website: <http://jweinsteinlaw.com/Canopy%20

Botanicals,%20S_R_L_,%20Products%20of%20Bolivia.htm>

183  Carbon Sequestration Hearing, supra note 9, Heydlauff testimony at 6; Nina

Robertson & Sven Wunder, Fresh Tracks in the Forest: Assessing Incipient
Payments for Environmental Services Initiatives in Bolivia (2005), at 19, available at
<http://www.cifor.cgiar.org/pes/publications/pdf_ﬁles/BRobertson0501.pdf>.

184  Roerhorst, supra note 61, at 5.

185  Id. (citing Birchard, Bill, A pragmatic activist: Bill Birchard meets John Sawhill, an
NGO chief for whom Big Business is friend, not foe, TOMORROW number 4, vol.
IX, July-August 1999.)

186  David Lore, Forest Project Helping AEP Offset Toxins, Columbus Dispatch (Ohio),
(May 28, 2000), (Quoting Dale Heydlauff) [Hereinafter “Offset Toxins article”] (See
Noel Kempff Reference Documents)

187  Greenpeace, The Economics of 2°C and REDD in Carbon Markets, Greenpeace

summary of KEA3 report: “REDD and the effort to limit global warming to 2°C:
Implications for including REDD credits in the international carbon market,” (30
March 2009), available at <http://www.greenpeace.org/raw/content/usa/press-
center/reports4/the-economics-of-2-c-and-redd.pdf>. The report’s conclusions
highlight the negative impacts of REDD credits. It also highlights that, “signiﬁcant
questions of permanence, leakage, and additionality have been raised about
potential REDD credits; as well as the ability of countries to accurately measure,
monitor, and report on such emissions. Issues of quality need to be addressed for
any REDD mechanism to succeed, but cause signiﬁcant problems when REDD is
used to offset industrialised country emissions.’ It concludes that ‘including forest
offset credits in the carbon markets would crash the price of carbon up to 75%
under currently stated reduction targets.”

188  Offset Toxins article, supra note 186.

189  See, for example, AEP’s portfolio of greenhouse gas initiatives in “AEP’s Strategy for
Managing Climate Risks,” Bruce H. Braine, AEP’s Strategy for Managing Climate
Risks, December 1, 2004, at 5 [presentation at EPA 3rd International Conference
on SF6 and the Environment], available at <http://www.epa.gov/electricpower-sf6/
documents/conf04_braine_paper.pdf>

190  SGS Validation Report Summary, supra note 60, at 16 (between 1997-2005 net

carbon offsets achieved by the project totalled 989,622 tonnes CO2).

191  Id. (between 1997-2026 net carbon offsets achieved by the project are estimated

171  Interview on ﬁle with author.

to total 5,836,961).

172  Interview on ﬁle with author. “They” refers to the programme set up by FAN called

PRODECOM (previously APOCOM).

192  From a baseline of 1998-2001 average emissions. See Bruce H. Braine, Vice
President, Strategic Policy Analysis, American Electric Power, “AEP’s Strategy
for Managing Climate Change Risks,” [Hereinafter “AEP Strategy Climate Risks”]
available here: <http://www.epa.gov/electricpower-sf6/documents/conf04_braine_
paper.pdf>; AEP IRRC Greenhouse Gas Proﬁle, supra note 6.

CARBON SCAM: Noel Kempff Climate Action Project

23

193  Other forestry activities in which AEP is a partner include for example:

Guaraqueçaba Climate Action Project — this project seeks to restore and protect
nearly 20,000 acres of partially degraded and/or deforested land in the tropical
Atlantic rainforest of Brazil. The Project is expected to offset approximately 1
million metric tonnes of carbon over 40 years; UtiliTree Carbon Company — this
is a consortium of 41 utilities organised by the Edison Electric Institute to invest
in a portfolio of forestry projects that manage GHG emissions, particularly CO2.
AEP claims that a $3.2 million investment in eight domestic and two international
projects will capture over 3 million tonnes of CO2 over the life of these projects. See
AEP Shareholder Report (2004), available at <http://www.aep.com/environmental/
reports/shareholderreport/docs/FullReport.pdf>. See also AEP IRRC Greenhouse
Gas Proﬁle, supra note 6.

194  AEP Strategy Climate Risks, supra note 192, at 5.

195  Talking about Noel Kempff - Jeremy Weinstein, lawyer hired by Paciﬁcorp in 1989
as in house counsel for venture projects like Canopy Botanicals arising from
Noel Kempff. Jeremy Weinstein, Innovative Financing and Forest Conservation,
Environmental Finance, June 2000, at 25, available at <http://jweinsteinlaw.com/
pdfs/Canopy.pdf>.

196  Katherine Hamilton, et al., Ecosystem Marketplace and New Carbon Finance,
Fortifying the Foundation: State of the Voluntary Carbon Markets 2009, 20
May 2009, available at <http://ecosystemmarketplace.com/documents/cms_
documents/StateOfTheVoluntaryCarbonMarkets_2009.pdf>

197  Karan Capoor, et al., The World Bank, State and Trends of the Carbon Market

2009, May 2009, available at <http://wbcarbonﬁnance.org/docs/State___Trends_
of_the_Carbon_Market_2009-FINAL_26_May09.pdf>

198  Point Carbon, Carbon Market Transactions in 2020: Dominated by Financials?, May
21, 2008, available by subscription at: <http://www.pointcarbon.com/research/
carbonmarketresearch/analyst/1.917962>

199  Id.

200  By dividing the total project investment of 11.35 million by the original total amount
of CO2 avoided (about 55 million) the price per tonne of CO2 works out as about
$0.20. That is ﬁve tonnes per US dollar.

209  The Stern Review: The Economics of Climate Change, Summary of Conclusions,
at 1. The Review estimates that the costs and risks of climate change will result in
the loss of between 5-20% global gross domestic product per year. Available at:
<http://www.hmtreasury.gov.uk/d/CLOSED_SHORT_executive_summary.pdf>

210  See supra note 5 above, Ministerial Statement on REDD (Poznan, 12 December

2008)

211  The Clean Energy Jobs and American Power Act (Kerry-Boxer, 30 Sept. 2009),
at <http://www.epw.senate.gov/public/index.cfm?FuseAction=PressRoom.
PressReleases&ContentRecord_id=0C00344C-802A-23AD-4F4D-
EDB0C9408D2E>

212  The Montreal Protocol Multilateral Fund provides a precedent for striking a balance
between developing countries’ national sovereignty issues and developed country
input on funding priorities, while ensuring the efﬁcient allocation of resources to
actors at the sub-national level as needed.

213  KEA3: REDD and the effort to limit global warming to 2°C: Implications for including
REDD credits in the international carbon market (30 March 2009), at 11, available at
<http://www.greenpeace.org/forestsforclimate>

214  See Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), Climate Change 2007:

Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability, Contribution of Working Group II to the
Fourth Assessment Report; James Hansen, Tipping point: Perspective of a
climatologist, introductory chapter to Wildlife Conservation Society, State of the
Wild 2008-2009: A Global Portrait of Wildlife, Wildlands, and Oceans, at 6-15
(W. Woods, ed., 2009), available at <http://www.columbia.edu/~jeh1/2008/
StateOfWild_20080428.pdf>

215  Furthermore, while national reductions would help alleviate many of the worst

problems associated with sub-national forest offsets, there remain many problems
with including any fully fungible offsets from REDD in the regulatory carbon markets.
For more information visit <www.greenpeace.org/forestsforclimate>

216  Chris Jones et al, Committed ecosystem change due to climate change, Climate
Change: Global Risks, Challenges and Decisions, IOP Conf. Series: Earth and
Environmental Science 6 (2009) 062017 (doi:10.1088/1755-1307/6/6/062017_c),
IOP Publishing, (Copenhagen 10-12th March 2009)

201  The following shows the increasing cost per tonne of CO2. In March 2007, the

217  Christoph Sutter & Juan Parreno, Does the Current Clean Development

German Society for Technical Cooperation (GTZ), in a presentation to the UNFCCC
on “Lessons Learned from Avoided Deforestation,” reported that the cost per tonne
was US$1.87, see <http://unfccc.int/ﬁles/methods_and_science/lulucf/application/
pdf/070307dutschke.pdf>; and in 2009, both American Electric Power and The
Nature Conservancy reported that the cost per tonne had risen to US$7.60, see
<http://mydocs.epri.com/docs/PublicMeetingMaterials/0905/4SNGEB5QK69/
E232009_Braine_REDD_EPRI_Offsets_W5_Final.pdf> and <http://unfccc.int/ﬁles/
methods_and_science/lulucf/application/pdf/070307dutschke.pdf> respectively.

202  For example, the EU ETS, as of Sept. 8, 2009, was trading at € 15.32 per tonne

(equivalent to $22.18).

203  CCX credits were trading at less than $0.20 a tonne (In October 2009, while the

cost per tonne paid by the investors was $7.60 per tonne.

204  Congressional Budget Ofﬁce Cost Estimate: H.R. 2454 American Clean Energy and

Security Act of 2009, CBO, June 5, 2009, at <http://www.cbo.gov/ftpdocs/102xx/
doc10262/hr2454.pdf>; Jesse Jenkins, Climate Bill Analysis, Part 12: CBO
Projects Waxman-Markey Would Cut Cumulative Emissions by Just 2% through
2020, Breakthrough Institute, June 15, 2009 at <http://thebreakthrough.org/
blog/2009/06/climate_bill_analysis_part_xii.shtml>

205  See prices for the European Emission Trading Scheme and Chicago Climate
Exchange posted at <http://www.pointcarbon.com> and <http://www.
chicagoclimatex.com> (October 2009).

206  Even the current 2006 IPCC Guidelines for Greenhouse Gas Inventories suggest
a 60% uncertainty on reporting changes in carbon stocks. See 2006 IPPC GHG
Inventory Guidelines, supra note 148.

207  As noted elsewhere, one would be forced to argue what would have happened in

the absence of the project. The 15 km leakage buffer would appear to be highly
questionable in this regard.

208  Pavan Sukhdev, lead author, The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity
– Interim Report, The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity, European
Communities (2008). Available at <http://ec.europa.eu/environment/nature/
biodiversity/economics/pdf/teeb_report.pdf>

24 CARBON SCAM: Noel Kempff Climate Action Project

Mechanism (CDM) Deliver its Sustainable Development Claim: An Analysis of
Ofﬁcially Registered CDM Projects, Climatic Change, Vol. 84, No. 1 (Sept. 2007);
Karen Olsen, The Clean Development Mechanism’s Contribution to Sustainable
Development: A Review of the Literature, Climatic Change, Vol. 84, No. 1 (Sept.
2007); Lambert Schneider, Is the CDM fulﬁlling its environmental and sustainable
development objectives: An evaluation of the CDM and options for improvement,
Report prepared for WWF Berlin (Nov. 2007).

y
t
i
n
u
m
m
o
c

a
d
i
r
o
F
n

l

i

e
r
t
n
e
c

l

i

a
c
d
e
M

www.greenpeace.orgwww.greenpeace.orgPublished in October 2009by Greenpeace InternationalOttho Heldringstraat 5,1066AZ Amsterdam,The NetherlandsTel: +31 20 718 2000Greenpeace is an independent global campaigning organisation that acts to change attitudes and behavior, to protect and conserve the environment and to promote peace.