32

CARVING UP THE CONGO

CON IN THE CONGO –
THE MORAL BANKRUPTCY
OF THE WORLD BANK’S
INDUSTRIAL LOGGING MODEL

CARVING UP THE CONGO

33

‘It is not accidental that no

efforts have been made to

construct the fundamentals

of a regime to combat

corruption and illicit finance

schemes in the DRC. The

DRC’s history is one of rulers

aspiring to hold and retain a

monopoly of power. Salaries

of DRC officials have, in

practice, been regularly and

heavily supplemented by
revenues from bribery.’149

Report for USAID, 2003

INDUSTRIAL LOGGING IS
SUSTAINING CORRUPTION
IN THE DRC
In an environment of endemic corruption,
logging companies inevitably operate beyond
the rule of law. In the DRC, the logging
industry continues to feed the networks of
corruption that are obstacles to genuine
development. Through support for an
extractive industry-based model of
development, donor countries and agencies
such as the World Bank are effectively
undermining their own rhetoric on establishing
good governance and alleviating poverty.

In 2003 the Extractive Industries Review (EIR),
commissioned by the World Bank,
acknowledged the significant economic, social
and environmental risks of extractive
industries. It recommended that the World
Bank shape and sequence its interventions
according to the quality of governance in the
host country. Governance criteria can include,
amongst other things: the quality of the rule of
law; the risk of conflict; human rights
protection; recognition of and willingness to
protect the rights of indigenous peoples;
capacity to mitigate and manage the impacts
of extractive industries; and, government
capacity and willingness to publish and manage
revenues transparently and ensure effective
revenue sharing.145

Clearly the DRC has governance problems: the
Government’s institutional capacity and its
ability to manage revenues, including those
generated by industrial logging, remain weak.
Control over natural resources has been at the
heart of nearly a decade of war in the DRC and
serious questions have been raised about the
role of foreign companies in the extraction and
export of the country’s resources.146 Instability
plagued the transitional government and
violent conflict continues in parts of the
country.147 Corruption as a strategy for
survival among low- and middle-ranking law
enforcement civil servants (eg the acceptance
of bribes and lack of enforcement of
regulations) fuels and is fuelled by the high-
level corruption practised by the country’s
political elite whose power is based on profit
from natural resources such as forests.148

©Greenpeace/Reynaers

34

CARVING UP THE CONGO

©Greenpeace/Reynaers

‘Donors have treated

corruption as a technical

problem and emphasised data

management systems,

training programs and laws.

They have shied away from

the more political aspects,

such as strengthening

parliament, courts and anti-

corruption and auditing

bodies. They finance more

than half the national budget

and should do more to press

charges against corruption

suspects, … and hold

multinational corporations

accountable for violating

national and international

norms. A complete overhaul

of the approach to good
governance is needed.’150

International Crisis Group,

2006

Such vested interests also have the power to
sink attempts to improve governance and
increase transparency in the extractive
industries, as shown by the World Bank’s
attempted reforms to the DRC mining
sector.151

At the level of the forest itself, the rule of law
is almost absent. According to the World Bank,
the DRC ‘has not produced a single new
professional forester in the last ten years’.152
Local forestry officials are poorly and
irregularly paid, and often have no information
about current forest laws and policies (in some
cases even being unaware of the existence of
the Forestry Code), and no transport or basic
equipment such as GPS with which to do their
work. In any case they often lack key technical
skills such as forest management planning,
geographical mapping and the creation of
forest inventories.153

As the EIR concludes, and Greenpeace research
and investigations of industrial logging in
Central Africa confirm, natural resource
extractive industries have no record of
contributing to poverty reduction or genuine
development, and there is little hope that they
will do so in future. These industries both feed
off and fuel the whole spectrum of corruption,
from pragmatic bribery of forestry officers to
collusion with politicians and senior officials in
order to gain control of forest holdings (for
example, in breach of the moratorium).
Meanwhile, unconstrained by the rule of law,
logging goes ahead heedless of the social and
environmental consequences.

HOW DO TAX BREAKS FOR
TRANS-M’S RAINFOREST PLUNDER
SUPPORT POVERTY ALLEVIATION?

Logging in one of the most corrupt countries
in the world could become one way of earning
a quick buck. Those choosing to operate in the
DRC may be there precisely because of the
lack of accountability for the money they make
or the method of making it. How will the legal
review deal with such companies?

Trans-M Bois is a subsidiary of the Congo
Futur group, itself a subsidiary of the Beirut-
based Tajideen group.154 Congo Futur’s
presence in the DRC appears to date from
1997.155 It has rapidly become one of the
country’s leading importers of foodstuffs156
as well as major transporters.157

One of the companies managed by the Tajideen
family has a history of allegations of money
laundering. In May 2003, following a four-
month international investigation by Belgium’s
Economic Crimes Unit, judicial police raided the
Antwerp offices of Soafrimex, managed by
Kassim Tajideen, arrested several of its officials
and froze its bank accounts.158 The company
was accused of ‘large-scale tax fraud, money
laundering and trade in diamonds of doubtful
origin, to the value of tens of millions of
euros’.159 In December 2003, Belgian
authorities informed the Congolese embassy
in Brussels that investigations undertaken in
the DRC had shown that the company
systematically undervalued its imports,
shipping and insurance costs and that it filed
false customs declarations.160

Trans-M Bois is now becoming a major timber
producer in the DRC. The company appears to
have benefited from weak governance: since
the moratorium came into force, it has gained
titles covering 746,000 hectares. The Ministry
of Environment’s 24 May 2003 published
register of logging permits does not indicate
either the permit numbers of these titles or
when they were awarded.161 However, none of
Tran-M titles appear on the Ministry of
Environment’s unpublished June 2002
compendium.162

Trans-M has received preferential financial
treatment. In July 2004, along with the Italian-
owned Parcafrique, it was awarded special tax
and customs exemptions (for a minimum of

CARVING UP THE CONGO

35

©Greenpeace/Davison

three years) by the Congolese National
Investment Promotion Agency.163 The stated
aim of Trans-M’s exemption was to aid
purchase of forestry equipment for Trans-M’s
Befale logging title in the CBFP Maringa-Lopori-
Wamba landscape in Equateur Province. 164

Timber from Trans-M is imported into
European countries, including Belgium, France
and Germany.165 Danzer (through its trading
branch Interholco) has been a European
importer of Trans-M timber.166 Among the
timber Trans-M supplies to Europe is
afrormosia, commonly used in furniture and
flooring – afrormosia is listed under Appendix
II of the Convention on International Trade in
Endangered Species (CITES) (see p53).

ITB GETS ITS LOGGING
TITLES THANKS TO FRIENDS
IN HIGH PLACES

The World Bank has promoted the value of its
reform strategy – including the moratorium
and new Forestry Code. These measures,
however, rest in files in Kinshasa with no on-
the-ground reality. In the absence of on-the-
ground institutional capacity, the continuation
of legal abuses seems inevitable.

In the list of logging titles presented for legal
review, there are two titles belonging to the
Lebanese company Industrie de Transformation
de Bois (ITB)167 which fall on the border of the
CBFP Lake Tumba landscape area of Equateur
Province, covering together some 294,000
hectares. These two titles appear to have been
obtained in breach of the moratorium. ITB did
have a title168 in Equateur Province before the
moratorium entered into force, but the two
titles that are now up for legal review are
located in a different area and cover a larger
area of forest.

Both in Kinshasa and in the small logging town
of Bikoro near Lake Tumba, Greenpeace
became aware of rumours that a former high-
ranking forestry official facilitated ITB’s gaining
control of these forest holdings. When
Greenpeace spoke to the chief forester (chef
de chantier) for ITB at Bikoro, he openly
admitted that it was ‘thanks to’ this official
that ITB had come to Bikoro.169

Because the maps of pre- and post-
moratorium titles are not publicly available, it is
impossible for Greenpeace to make a definite
assessment of which logging titles are in
violation of the moratorium. Purely based on
the current list of 156 logging titles now up for
legal review, however, all titles in Bikoro date
from after the moratorium, and thus are
apparently in violation of both the moratorium
and the Forestry Code. This includes logging
titles held by ITB, the Congolese company
LEDYA,170 the Portuguese-managed company
Sodefor171 and the French-controlled
Scibois,172 which is logging in an area with
significant primary forests and of great
importance for bonobo conservation.173

In October 2006, Greenpeace also spoke to
two government officials in charge of rural
development and environment and forestry at
Bikoro. They confirmed that local authorities
have very little capacity – they have one
building for all the different government
services and no modern office equipment.
They have no car or a motorcycle to visit the
logging operations in the field (to check
boundaries of annual allowed cut-blocks,
minimum tree diameters, etc). Moreover,
agents are very poorly paid and have not
received sufficient training to enable them to
detect forest crime or enforce forest law. They
have no GPS or mapping software (nor the
expertise to operate such equipment), and lack
the know-how to estimate timber volumes on
outgoing log barges.174 Forestry officials also
lack clear knowledge of the Forestry Code or
the moratorium.

ITB’s chief forester at Bikoro confirmed that
officials rely on the information that the
logging companies hand over to them and are
incapable of conducting an effective
independent inspection:

‘When the forestry official visits our logging
site … he comes to our office asking us to
provide him with the figures on declared
production volumes. They are not capable of
verifying these things themselves … they don’t
know how to measure, they don’t know how
to identify wood species, really they don’t
know where to start. The inspections here
make me laugh; these people really need
training.’175

‘As for the legality of the

forest concessions granted to

your company by my

ministry, I can but confirm it.

In closing, I ask you to

proceed with your company’s

new investments programme

without giving in to panic,

because the protection of the

Government of Transition is
afforded to you.’179

Anselme Enerunga, Minister

for the Environment of the

DRC, letter to Sodefor,

20 December 2004

‘Like the Minister, I confirm

the legality of all the forest

concessions granted to you

and ask you to proceed with

new investment planned in

this field in order to

contribute once again to the

reduction of poverty in our
country.’180

Aboulaye Yerodia Ndombasi,

Vice President of the DRC,

letter to Sodefor,

26 January 2005

admitted to Greenpeace that because they are
so poorly and irregularly paid they are
dependent on logging companies.181 The result
is that, according to these forestry officials,
Sodefor declares a much lower timber
production volume than it actually logs.
Officials could not prove this, however, since
the company refuses to grant officials access
to relevant logging documentation in the
course of an inspection.

Timber from Sodefor is imported into
European countries including Belgium, France,
Germany, Italy and Portugal.182

Has NST been rewarded
for its wartime contribution?
Soforma (part of the NST group) is one
example of a company with alleged wartime
logging titles. According to Conflict timber, a
report commissioned by the US Government
aid agency USAID:

‘During the last Rwandan-Ugandan invasion of
the DRC, the Kabila Government requested
that logging companies cut timber for export
in reserve forests in Bas Congo Province [and]
split the proceeds 50/50 with the DRC
Government. The Government’s share
reportedly went to help finance the war effort
… Since 1999 – in the middle of the civil war –
… concessions were [awarded] in three forest
reserve areas (Ezini, Lukfwe and another)
where logging normally was not permitted …
Two logging companies carried out these
operations: MALBA and SOFORMA … Our
source believed that after the 50/50 split all
other taxes and levies that normally apply …
were suspended for wood harvested in this
operation … Wartime logging in those three
concessions should have produced … a total
value of $17-36 million.’183

36

CARVING UP THE CONGO

That forestry officials are reduced to
conducting such a paperwork exercise on a
post-moratorium title shows just how far the
DRC is from enforcing the rule of law in
its forests.

Timber from ITB is imported into European
countries including Belgium, France, Italy and
Portugal. Interholco (Danzer’s trading branch)
is a client of ITB.

NST ‘ENJOYS THE PROTECTION
OF TOP POLITICAL AUTHORITIES’
FROM LAW ENFORCEMENT

Even when the DRC’s rank-and-file forest
officials have the will to control the logging
industry, high level political interference can
block the establishment of the rule of law, as
the case of Sodefor shows.

Sodefor is subsidiary of the NST group, which
overall holds many millions of hectares of
rainforest (see pp82–85). In May–June 2006
and January 2007, Greenpeace visited a
number of communities in Bandundu Province
close to logging sites operated by Sodefor and
talked to local people and officials. On more
than one occasion forestry officials alleged
that the company was ‘protected’ by the
authorities. For example, north-east of
Bandundu, officials complained of their total
lack of control over Sodefor:

‘We have had orders from the authorities not
to carry out inspections … They enjoy
protection at the highest level.’176

Other local authorities told Greenpeace a
similar story: ‘Sodefor is protected in Kinshasa,
and we lack resources. We do nonetheless
manage to carry out inspections and produce
reports, but Kinshasa just marks them not to
be followed up.’177 A forestry official in
Bandundu also felt that Sodefor had links with
the upper echelons in Kinshasa and was ‘totally
protected’.178

The forestry service in Bandundu has no
vehicles, leaving the staff dependent on the
logging companies for transport. Moreover,
almost all personnel are based in towns rather
than at logging sites. Forestry staff have

CARVING UP THE CONGO

37

©Kim Gjerstad

WILL POLITICALLY ‘PROTECTED’
OPERATIONS PASS THE LEGAL
REVIEW?

Equateur Province was heavily affected by the
many years of war in the DRC – particularly
the ‘occupation’ between 1998 and 2003. In
this period, the region was part of the
occupied zone of the DRC, completely cut off
from Kinshasa and the region was under the
rebel control of Jean-Pierre Bemba’s
Mouvement de Libération du Congo (MLC).

The MLC is repeatedly accused of having
engaged in large-scale killing of civilians,
systematic rape and extensive looting as
recently as March 2003.184 Former MLC
members were active in Equateur in July
2004, when the UNSC denounced
‘unauthorised internal movement of weapons’
by the group within the province.185
Throughout the conflict, the MLC financed

itself by controlling the trafficking of
diamonds to buyers across the Oubangui
river in the Central African Republic.186
Timber also appears to have been of strategic
value to the MLC’s fighting capacity.187

In May 2004, a ministerial decree188 awarded
the Lebanese-owned Compagnie Forestière du
Bassin du Congo (CFBC) the right to prospect
in a 750,000 hectare area in the heart of
MLC-controlled northern Equateur Province.
The company has been repeatedly linked with
Jean-Pierre Bemba and represents a clear case
of the ongoing politicised nature of logging in
the DRC. CFBC was allegedly set up with the
‘blessing’ of Jean-Pierre Bemba,189 and is
considered ‘untouchable’,190 its managers
accused of ‘systematically plundering’ the
Congolese forest.191

38

CARVING UP THE CONGO

©Greenpeace/Daniels

‘[In the DRC] the looting that

was previously conducted by

the armies themselves has

been replaced with organized

systems of embezzlement,

tax fraud, extortion, the use

of stock options as kickbacks

and diversion of State funds

conducted by groups that

closely resemble criminal

organizations … The most

important element in

effectively halting the illegal

exploitation of resources in

the Democratic Republic of

the Congo relates to the

political will of those who

support, protect and benefit
from the networks.’192

UN Security Panel, 2002

The 2004 decree granting CFBC prospecting
rights stipulates that logging ‘under any
pretext’ is ‘strictly forbidden’ throughout the
prospecting period,193 although cutting
reportedly began in the autumn of 2004.194
In March and October 2005, the company was
granted two lettres d’intention near Libenge,
totalling 358,000 hectares.195 The post-May
2002 signing of these logging contracts to
CFBC suggests another violation of the
moratorium and breach of the Forestry Code.

A clear governance issue is tax avoidance by
not declaring exports. One consequence of the
lack of capacity in the forestry service and
corruption in the DRC is that timber smuggling
is rife: according to the International Crisis
Group there are indications that actual timber
export levels are as much as seven times
higher than official figures.196 It seems highly
unlikely that export tax is paid on timber
exported from the DRC where the timber has
not been recorded in the official figures.

CFBC is accused of exporting timber through
the Central African Republic to Cameroon.197
According to a report of investigations by the
Congolese human rights Les Voix des Sans-
Voix (VSV), this has been carried out under
escort from Bemba’s former personal guard,
a detachment of the Division de protection
présidentielle (DPP), without inspection at
border checkpoints.198

Within three months of CFBC’s arrival in
Libenge, protests by local people were met
with intimidation and arrests by local
authorities.199 In April 2006, angry residents of
Libenge attempted to attack the house of the
CFBC managing director after the child of a
company employee was killed in a traffic
accident involving a CFBC log truck.200 The
manager’s house was allegedly protected by
DPP guards.201

According to the report on the investigations
of VSV, several of the protestors arrested and
imprisoned sustained ‘inhuman’ treatment in
jail, including beatings and deprivation of
food. The official ‘inquiry commission’
dispatched to Libenge after the incident
appears to have been a retaliatory mission:
police and military reportedly committed
‘reprisals’ and ‘extortion’. VSV indicates that
provincial authorities had previously
attempted to suspend CFBC operations, but

that the MLC ordered their continuation.202

As illustrated above, CFBC’s titles, totalling
more than 350,000 hectares, awarded after
the moratorium203 seem to enjoy political
protection. They are a real test case for the
legal review. The outcome of the legal review
will provide a reality check as to whether the
World Bank’s strategy for reform is overcoming
corruption and bringing the rule of law to the
governance of the DRC’s natural resources.

Timber from CFBC is imported into European
countries including France, Italy and Portugal.204

THE WORLD BANK GROUP
AND GERMAN GOVERNMENT
FUND OLAM’S ILLEGAL
LOGGING OPERATIONS

Over three and half years after the
moratorium was put in place, three titles
totalling over 300,000 hectares were granted
to a newcomer to the DRC timber industry:
the multinational trading company Olam
International Ltd.205

Olam’s activities include logging, timber trade
and wood processing. It is expanding its
global interests into countries known for
conflict timber and other issues related to the
illegal timber trade. It has had trading
interests in Burma,206 a country accused of
gross human rights abuses. In terms of
respect for governance, in June 2005, Olam
Gabon was reported to owe nearly 7 million
FCFA ($14,000) in forestry back taxes.207
More recently in Ghana, Olam has also been
involved in large-scale fraudulent
underdeclaration of its timber exports and
timber from illegal sources that was sold to
Olam by its suppliers. The loss in financial
revenue to the state of Ghana is estimated to
be several million dollars.208

In November 2003, the World Bank’s private-
sector investment branch, the International
Finance Corporation (IFC), invested $15 million
in Olam to help it expand its global
operations.209 The IFC estimated that about
5% of this investment ‘would benefit Olam’s
worldwide timber operations’ of which an
unspecified amount ‘will be expected to
finance sawmilling in Africa’.210

In June 2004 the IFC approved a further $50
million partial guarantee to Olam, as part of a
$150 million package to help Olam in part
‘increase trading volumes from Africa’.211 This
loan was a ‘Category C’ loan – ie environmental
and social risks were not judged to be
significant because Olam ‘promotes sustainable
forest management practices and its operations
are considered fully consistent with the
requirements of the November 2002 World
Bank Forests Policy.’ 212

In 2005, the German public development bank
DEG (a subsidiary of KfW Bankengruppear)
approved a ¤15 million loan to Olam to expand
‘warehouse, processing and transport
capacities’.213

Olam has now become an important player in
the DRC timber industry and is heavily involved
in DRC’s timber trade via various contracts with
third-party suppliers and partnerships in which
Olam buys logs from third parties (eg buying
Afrormosia logs near Kisangani).214

Olam also facilitates logging operations in
areas where it is not the title holder. In Yuki,
Bandundu Province, for example, Olam is
logging as an effective subcontractor for the
Office National des Transports (ONATRA), the
largely dysfunctional national transport
authority. Although Article 95 of the Forestry
Code expressly forbids subcontracting, there
are many legal loopholes: for instance, one
company can ‘rent’ equipment and labour
from another.

Local authorities seem to have no knowledge
of a 2004 subcontracting agreement, and they
have no knowledge of how much timber the
company is logging. According to local people,
many log rafts have been seen lacking the
distinguishing markings that they are supposed
to carry.215

Timber from the DRC traded by OLAM is
imported into European countries including
Belgium, France, Germany and Portugal.216

CARVING UP THE CONGO

39

©Greenpeace/Daniels

‘There is simply no way to

conduct business in the

DRC without some form
of bribery.’224

Report for USAID, 2003

‘It is questionable whether

a legitimate industry can

even exist in the DRC where

corruption is rampant and
accountability minimal.’225

International Security

Information Service, 2002

40

CARVING UP THE CONGO

LOGGING IN REBEL-HELD
TERRITORY – PAYING THE
‘ADMINISTRATION’

The World Bank’s strategy to bring the logging
sector under control fails to call into question
the operations of the largest players in the DRC.
Yet it is these same companies who have been
operating within the DRC system of corruption
for years and who have profited from holding
their titles under a very relaxed tax regime.
Even if the legal review of logging titles is
rigorously conducted, established companies
who are not obviously implicated in moratorium
violations may remain largely unscrutinised.

The Danzer Group is among the top five
logging and timber trading operators in Central
Africa. Recent Greenpeace investigations have
exposed the Group’s involvement in forest
crimes including trading in illegal timber;
bribery; suspected forgery of documents; and
dealing with timber companies and individuals
who have been blacklisted by UN Security
Council for involvement in illicit arms
trafficking activities in Liberia.217 For instance,
one of Danzer Group’s trading partners, Guus
von Kouwenhoven, a Dutch citizen, was
arrested in The Netherlands in March 2005 and
is now serving an eight-year prison sentence
for violating a UN arms embargo.218

Danzer subsidiary Siforco is the second largest
logging company in DRC in terms of forest
under its control (1.9 million hectares).
Siforco’s power and money make the company
effectively a state within a state in an area of
several thousand square kilometres in Equateur
and Orientale Provinces.219 In the towns of
Bumba, Buta and Aketi, people are dependent
on the company to maintain the transport
network and water and electricity
infrastructure.220

As Greenpeace research shows, the company’s
operations in the DRC are proving just as
ethically questionable as Danzer’s operations
elsewhere in Central Africa.

Siforco has been active in the DRC since
1972.221 According to a report on Siforco, the
compan made payments to the MLC rebel-
controlled administration in Equateur during
the recent war,222 and also makes regular
payments to forestry authorities.223

Siforco’s operations were disrupted by war, but
in November 2002, it resumed logging
operations in its 523,340 hectare K8226 forest
zone near Bumba – while the area was still
under control of the MLC (a rebel movement
controlled by warlord-turned-politician Jean-
Pierre Bemba – see pages 82–85).

Olof von Gagern, Head of Danzer’s African
operations, claims that the company ‘made
neither direct payments to the MLC nor
provided the rebel army with logistical support
or aid of any kind. At no time has there been
any contact between SIFORCO and MLC
troops.’227 However, the timing of Siforco’s
resumption of operations in K8, and the fact
that it was paying ‘administrative’ taxes in MLC
rebel-controlled territory,228 implicate Siforco

CARVING UP THE CONGO

41

submit to a taxation system which is unofficial,
totally unregulated, and highly prejudicial to
both the competitiveness and the
transparency of the companies themselves’.233
The report goes on to describe some of the
ways Siforco maintains this ‘highly prejudicial’
system. As elsewhere in the DRC, institutional
capacity is grossly inadequate. Monitoring and
inspection staff are under-equipped and
poorly paid by the authorities.234 In order to
maintain ‘some semblance of operational
administration’, officials are paid directly by
Siforco according to a formal scale when they
come to inspect its operations ranging from
¤50 for the highest grades (provincial
environment coordinator) to ¤5 for the lowest
(police officer). The report admits that the
ambiguity of this collusion between the
logging industry and law enforcement
authorities calls into question the very concept
of legality.235

This state of affairs illustrates perfectly how in
the chaos of the country’s grossly under-
resourced forestry environment, lack of
capacity can shade into corruption, aided and
abetted by the logging industry.

As with NST, Siforco has significant influence
beyond the rainforest it controls,236 via all sort
of partnerships (including subcontracting in all
but name).

Timber from Siforco is imported into European
countries including Belgium, Denmark, France,
the Netherlands and the UK. It is also exported
to China.237

©Greenpeace/Reynaers

‘Haag reaches Maluku. The

heart is beating. The rebel

government is in the driving

seat. The employees of the

plant are cheering. With

Haag comes hope. The rebels

negotiate with Haag:
Progress continues.’ 230

Econo Magazine, interview

with Head of Siforco, 2006

in the conflict timber trade. In a recent
interview in the German forestry magazine
Econo, the Head of Siforco admits that the
company had to negotiate with the MLC upon
its return in 2002.229

At the time that Siforco was resuming logging
and paying money to a MLC rebel-controlled
administration, it was known that the MLC was
committing crimes against humanity in the
Central African Republic and elsewhere in the
DRC, and using child soldiers.231 MLC soldiers
were later convicted for the mass rape of at
least 119 women and children.232

A confidential report on the company glosses
over the ethical problems with such payments:
‘logging companies have little choice but to

42

CARVING UP THE CONGO

©Greenpeace/Reynaers

INDUSTRIAL LOGGING-LED POVERTY ALLEVIATION IS A CHARADE
The stated aim of the World Bank’s strategy
for reform of the logging sector is to help
alleviate poverty. The Forestry Code which it
persuaded the DRC Government to adopt
makes provisions for taxes collected from
logging operations to be redistributed back
from national to local level, to provide money
for regional development. It also formalises a
system whereby logging companies negotiate
direct compensation with local communities
for access to their forest, and requires
companies to develop forest management
plans, one aspect of which is to ensure that
communities retain rights to forest resources
and services.

However, given the context of corruption that
typifies the DRC, there is little realistic hope
that the industrial logging model of
development will improve people’s quality of
life. In fact, as Greenpeace research and
investigations show, money from taxation
rarely materialises, the direct development
offered to local communities by logging
companies is a cruel deception, and industrial
logging degrades the essential forest resources
on which the vast majority of the DRC’s people
depend – while communities who challenge
logging companies over these issues may well
face a violent response. In this way, the people
of the DRC are left poorer as logging
companies plunder their forests.

‘Any discussion of forests and

forestry in the DRC should

have as its primary focus the

fact that the vast majority of

people in the DRC depend on

wild plants and animals for

their health, for their energy,

for their medicines, for their

food and in many cases for
their cash income.’238

David Kaimowitz, Chairman,

CIFOR, 2004

A 2005 report presenting the proposed World
Bank-managed Trustfund248 on good
governance in the DRC forestry sector
suggests that the sector has the potential to
reach harvest levels of 5 million m3, and be
worth $100 million a year to the State.249
However, the area of rainforest that would
need to be opened up to achieve such levels,
and the related environmental damage, would
be massive. Further, more recent World Bank
reports concede that production levels are
unlikely to reach more than 20% of that figure
over the next decade.250

In contrast, the value of the forest and forest
products such as food, medicine and building
materials to the people of the DRC is largely
unquantifiable. The equivalent economic value
of these non-timber forest products is
estimated at more than $2 billion a year.251
Moreover, scientists have confirmed that
many of the medicinal plants found in the
forests have significant therapeutic value.252

Yet the continued availability of these goods is
jeopardised by industrial logging, which both
degrades the forest that provides them and
impedes forest people’s access to them, while
offering little in return beyond promises of
local development projects that are fulfilled at
best in part and often not at all. For forest
dwellers, indeed, the arrival of the loggers may
herald not just lost resources but new burdens
of social conflict, prostitution and disease.

The conclusion, inevitably, is that the industry’s
overall effect on the country’s social well-
being will continue to be negative.253

CARVING UP THE CONGO

43

‘I recently returned to a

village where I worked as a

young forester. When I left

25 years ago, it was with the

promise that logging would

bring a future of social and

economic development.

Timber was the only resource

these villages had to ignite

development. And today,

commercial timber is gone.

The same families are there.

They were poor 25 years ago

and they are poor today. But

today, they have less forest

and less hope. They feel

cheated by the government,

the private sector, the local

chiefs and by me. They feel

let down. And I believe that in

many ways they are right. We

are all responsible for letting
them down.’254

Giuseppe Topa, Africa forest

specialist, the World Bank,

2002

©Greenpeace/Davison

TIPPING THE SCALES: THE COST OF
INDUSTRIAL LOGGING FAR OUTWEIGHS ITS
CONTRIBUTIONS TO DEVELOPMENT
The people of the DRC are some of the
poorest in the world. According to the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
nearly 90% of the population lives on less
than $1 a day.239 Today the economy of the
DRC is largely based on subsistence activities,
which account for 80% of the economy.240
Of the approximately 62.5 million people241
in the DRC, about 40 million242 are
dependent on the country’s forests – not for
money gained from the international logging
trade, but for daily survival: food, medicine,
energy, building materials and the value of
non-timber forest products.

The DRC has Heavily Indebted Poor Country
status: its burden of debt remains huge and
the cost of servicing this debt (a third of it
owed to multilateral institutions such as the
World Bank and IMF)243 will account for up to
40% of public revenues in 2007,244 leaving
little to be spent on the provision of basic
services or the restoration of desperately
needed infrastructure after the devastation of
the war.

As for guarantees of a sustainable environment
(one of the UN Millennium Development
Goals), according to the UNDP the absence of
rational exploitation of natural resources and
the associated economic changes have had a
clearly negative impact.245

Even if industrial logging were to be conducted
in a lawful, transparent and sustainable
manner, the value of the goods the forest
provides to the wider population would still far
outweigh that of the logging industry. For
2006, the industry’s contribution to state
revenues was estimated to be $10.6 million
on an assumed 500,000m3 timber harvest.246
Forestry revenues are contributing just 0.7%
of GNP.247

The international community has been
presenting highly optimistic estimates of
potential future logging revenues to the DRC
Government. Such optimism is both dangerous
and misleading as it encourages the misguided
belief that logging will contribute to
development.

44

CARVING UP THE CONGO

LOGGING AT LAKE TUMBA
IS DESTROYING FOREST
COMMUNITY RESOURCES

The Lake Télé-Lake Tumba Swamp Forest
landscape is a priority landscape identified by
the CBFP for conservation and sustainable
management. Covering 12.6 million hectares
(or about four times the size of Belgium) and
straddling the border between the DRC and
the Republic of the Congo, it is the most
extensive block of swamp and seasonally
inundated forest in Africa. The rainforests to
the west of Lake Tumba are important for the
conservation of bonobo. Other threatened
species that occur in this landscape are forest
elephant, hippopotamus, red-tailed monkey
(Cercopithecus ascanius), red colobus monkey
(Piliocolobus badius) and slender-snouted
crocodile (Crocodylus cataphractus).
Additionally, fish biodiversity and endemism
are high, although as yet poorly researched.255

Local communities in this landscape rely on fish
for 90% of their protein consumption and
overfishing has been identified together with
bushmeat hunting as the two major threats to
the landscape.256 However, the expanding
logging industry looks set to become a major
additional threat.

The Lake Tumba region is home not only to
Bantu agriculturalists but also to numerous
Twa pygmy (semi hunter-gatherer)
communities. The logging operations already
active and planned often overlap to a large
degree with the forest on which these
communities depend; consequently, the
forest-dwellers may be forced to go further
into less disturbed areas to meet their needs.
Once companies establish themselves in the
region – building roads, negotiating social
responsibility contracts, bringing in workers –
it will be very difficult to turn back the clock.

The Lebanese logging company ITB has been
actively logging in the area since mid-2005,
and several other companies may start up
operations soon (Sodefor is already
prospecting in the area).

In conversation with Greenpeace, ITB’s chief
forester claimed that the company is making a
positive contribution to the communities of
Bikoro, near Lake Tumba – it contracts some
140 local workers plus 20–30 workers on a
daily basis (journaliers) for its nearby logging

©Kim Gjerstad

operations (it is said that on average six people
depend on the salary of one worker in a
logging company). The company pays the
school fees for its workers’ children and claims
to contribute some 250,000 CFR per month
(about $475) to the hospital in Bikoro for
treatment of its workers. ITB’s chief forester
also stressed the fact that thanks to ITB’s
logging road it is now much easier for people
to transport their agricultural products
to market.257

However, in terms of sustainable development
for the local communities, ITB’s contribution is
minimal, and jobs are likely to disappear once
the area is commercially logged out, as has
happened elsewhere.

In exchange for a few gifts to local Bantu
community leaders (part of the social
responsibility contract practice explained on

CARVING UP THE CONGO

45

©Greenpeace/Reynaers

page 48), ITB has gained access to large
volumes of wengé (Millettia laurentii) timber
worth hundreds of thousands of dollars.
As soon as ITB abandons the area, there will
be no need for it to maintain the road to
facilitate logging access. Without
maintenance, the logging road will rapidly
deteriorate. The housing conditions of the
company’s workers are appalling. Hardly any
other local development can be attributed to
the company.

In conversation with Greenpeace, ITB’s chief
forester claimed that since ITB arrived in
Bikoro more products (such as sugar and toilet
paper) have become available on the local
market, brought in on ITB barges coming from
Kinshasa.258 On the other hand, local people
told Greenpeace that with the growing
economic activity and overexploitation of
natural resources, prices of many products

have rapidly increased. Fish has become much
more expensive; the price of a goat has
doubled. Several people also indicate that
prostitution is on the rise in Bikoro due to the
logging money.259

In 2006, local Bantu communities told a
Greenpeace field team that ITB has destroyed
their farmland with bulldozers to clear the area
for logging roads. Near the village of Ibenga,
local people showed fresh evidence of crops
(manioc, banana trees, cacao) allegedly
destroyed by ITB’s activities. Some farmers
complained that while the damage to their
crops has been very extensive, the company
has offered very little compensation. When
villagers complained to ITB about the
inadequacy of the compensation offered, the
company’s representative told them to choose
between accepting the offer and getting
nothing at all.260

‘Despite a forestry

moratorium in place since

2002, which was extended

by presidential decree in

October 2005, the State

has admitted that logging

has continued, and that

concessions have been

granted on indigenous

peoples’ lands and territories

without prior consultation

or consent and with disregard

for their internationally
guaranteed rights.’261

Forest Peoples Programme

et al.

46

CARVING UP THE CONGO

©Greenpeace/Reynaers

‘Women have no voice.

Pygmies have no voice. In the

forest areas of the DRC,

pygmy communities —

widely considered as being

‘backward’ — are numerically

significant. Although some

progress has been made at

the discourse level, this has

had practically no impact on

the realities of women and

indigenous peoples. These

exclusions are serious

handicaps to the Congo’s

broader development needs.

… Logging companies

reinforce these forms of
exclusion.’262

Theodor Trefon, 2006

FURTHER SOCIAL EXCLUSION FOR
HUNTER-GATHERER COMMUNITIES

The experience of the Twa pygmies of the Lake
Tumba area has been one of further social
exclusion as well as the loss of vital forest
resources. For instance, elders in the Twa camp
of Nkwete told Greenpeace that they were
barely consulted by ITB in advance of logging.
Instead, ITB negotiated with an individual Bantu
(a former chief) from a nearby village who
claimed to be the traditional owner of
the forest.263

After the Twa complained that the forest was
theirs, the company made a take-it-or-leave-
it offer to the Nkwete community, to which
the local chief felt he had no option but to
agree.

In an AFP article about negotiations between
pygmy communities and loggers in the Lake
Tumba area, entitled ‘Pygmies ready to hand
over their forests for soap’, a Twa elder is
reported as admitting:

‘We will take whatever we are being given. …
Soap and salt means a lot to us.’264

The Twa live in the heart of an area of high
conservation importance, but they are
increasingly surrounded by loggers (including
ITB, whose logging contracts were signed after
the moratorium, see pages 82–83). The forest
is of critical importance to their culture and
daily subsistence. When Greenpeace visited
the area, many Twa complained that ITB was
cutting down trees of great importance to the

community, to build bridges along its logging
roads.265 These trees, of the species essia
(Petersianthus macrocarpus), are used for
bridge-building by logging companies in the
area. However, they are frequented by
caterpillars that offer a critical source of
protein to local communities, and their loss due
to logging operations is a frequent source of
complaint in the DRC.

Timber from ITB is imported into European
countries including Belgium, France, Italy and
Portugal. Interholco (Danzer’s trading branch)
is a client of ITB.266

TREE OF LIFE: INDIGENOUS USES FOR THE
SAPELE TREE
For forest-dwelling communities, the sapele
tree Entandrophragma cylindricum represents
an important resource for food and medicine
and as a construction material.

Large sapele trees are an important host tree
for a protein-rich species of caterpillar,
Imbrasia (Nudaurelia) oyemensis. In the DRC,
several other tree species are also important
host trees for other caterpillar species. During
the caterpillar season, when game is difficult to
hunt and next year’s crops are not yet ripe,
caterpillars account for around three-quarters
of the protein eaten by pygmies in the
northern Republic of the Congo.267

In addition, the caterpillars provide an
important source of income. Collecting
caterpillars can provide a higher annual income
per hectare than growing crops.268 The UN
Food and Agriculture Organisation estimates
that the consumption of caterpillars in the DRC
is about 13,500 tonnes per year. With an
average market price of $0.60/kg, the total
market value of caterpillars is therefore
estimated to be more than $8 million
per year.269

Sapele bark also has important medicinal
properties. It is commonly used for the
treatment of headaches associated with
malaria and of swollen and painful eye
infections, and also to relieve exhausted and
painful feet.270

Thanks to its strength, buoyancy and water
resistance, sapele is considered the best wood
for pirogues (dug-out canoes). It also makes
an ideal central roof support.271

CARVING UP THE CONGO

47

©Greenpeace/Davison

TAXING CREDIBILITY: THE
REVENUE FROM LOGGING WILL
NOT GO FAR … FROM KINSHASA

Central to the World Bank’s strategy for
development via reform of the forestry sector
is the redistribution of tax revenues back from
national to local level, backed up by an
increased level of area tax. This is supposed to
bring funding to enable the state to provide
social infrastructure.

The tax revenue redistribution is at best a
limited measure, however. In 2007 the area tax
is $0.50/hectare (in the case of new
allocations following the legal review, the level
of area tax to be paid will be determined by
the offer of the highest bidder). Assuming that
10 million hectares of forest is under
concession after the legal review and that tax
collection from these concessions is 100%
effective, the measure will still only net total
revenue of $5 million annually, of which 40%
($2 million) is to be redistributed to provinces
and territories to ensure the provision of basic
community infrastructure in a country about
the size of Western Europe.

‘Information in our possession

gives an account of the

current state of play

regarding the assignment of

forest area royalties resulting

from logging in Orientale

Province … This completely

incomprehensible situation

not only violates the relevant

provisions of the Forestry

Code, but also by its nature

deprives Orientale Province of

necessary resources for

reconstruction after the years
of war and destruction.’272

Théo Baruti Amisi Ikumaiyete,

Governor of Orientale

Province, 2005

It is clear that access to the

documents allowing proper

verification of the state of

affairs of tax payment ...is
difficult if not impossible.273

WRI-Agreco (Independent

Observer for DRC forestry

reform), 2007

In reality, of course, even less money is likely
to be available, since the process threatens to
be undermined by corruption, as has happened
in neighbouring Cameroon. To date in the DRC,
systems of distribution or control to ensure
that this money is actually devolved have
simply not been set up at provincial or
territorial levels. According to the World Bank,
area fees were not transferred in 2003-
2006.274

Given the experience of the impacts of poor
institutional capacity and corruption in
Cameroon, it is hard to imagine how the World
Bank can have been so naïve as to allow such a
situation to arise again. In any event, it is clear
that local communities have not benefited at
all, as yet.

48

CARVING UP THE CONGO

‘Social responsibility contracts’ –
the charity of loggers is a poor
substitute for genuine development

In the DRC, as elsewhere in Central Africa,
logging companies frequently negotiate local
agreements (so-called social responsibility
contracts) with customary landowners and
communities as a means of securing their
cooperation. The World Bank – recognising
that forest-dwelling communities will see little
benefit from fiscal reform and tax
redistribution – has pushed for the adoption of
the Forestry Code through which this process
of direct negotiation of services is to be
formalised, and for new agreements to be
brokered with communities by companies
passing the legal review.275 However, this
approach offers a poor substitute both for
genuine development, and for the policy of
community consultation and prior, informed
consent that is supposed to precede land use
decisions.

Typically, the company will first negotiate
access to the forest with the customary
landowners in return for a small quantity of
gifts or provision of services to the
community. Before logging begins, the
company then negotiates the social
responsibility contract (cahier des charges).
Such agreements, which currently have no
legal basis, typically involve promises by the
companies to provide goods and equipment
and to construct or renovate facilities such as
schools, clinics and wells. They have long
served as a substitute for proper development,
allowing government to wash its hands of the
well-being of forest-dwelling communities. A
forestry sector review for the World Bank
concedes this point:

‘In well functioning States, the State …
provides social services throughout the
country. In the DRC context, the cahier des

©Greenpeace/Davison

‘The loggers buy social peace

by negotiating benefits in

kind with the local elites

(official and traditional

authorities) and local

communities. This relation has

often been depicted as “wood

for beer and a football
pitch”.’276

Confidential report on Siforco,

2006

CARVING UP THE CONGO

49

themselves, rather than negotiating
investments that benefit the entire community
(see Trans-M case study on pages 50–53); or
signing away the villagers’ right to protest when
companies damage crops or fail to abide by
their agreements. In many villages, most people
are not even aware of the agreements that
have been made between the loggers and the
traditional landowners. Similarly, when both
Bantu and pygmy communities claim rights
over the same forest area (see ITB Lake Tumba
case study on pages 44–46), the hunter-
gatherer pygmies, who are most dependent
upon the forest, may be sidelined.

Even when a social responsibility contract is
negotiated on behalf of the full community,
the negotiations never happen on an equal
basis (‘pas libre, pas transparent, pas
équitable’283): the local traditional landowners
and the wider community lack any ownership
of the process, since they are unfamiliar with
forestry law and often do not have a true
sense of the economic value of their forest.
Thus villagers are always in the weak position:
the fact that local government civil servants
and/or police are sometimes present during
such negotiations (and typically take the side
of the logging company) hampers a fair
negotiating process (see Trans-M case study
on page 48). Villagers feel powerless to defend
themselves against the interests of a logging
company working hand-in-glove with the
state. They fear intimidation and arrest if they
react (see Sodefor and Sicobois case studies
on pages 50–53). Unsurprisingly, they often
feel it is better to get something than nothing
at all.

Once social responsibility contracts are
signed, the communities concerned have little
or no leverage to ensure compliance, and
there is currently no legal mechanism for
conflict resolution. Even when contracts are
respected, the paternalistic terms in which
they are framed do little to empower
communities or promote genuine
development – as a report into Siforco’s
operations observes: ‘The contribution of
forestry exploitation to local development
remains confined within the sterile bounds
of a relation of near total dependence.’284

charges makes up for the State’s inability to
provide such services in remote areas.’278

Companies often fail to meet their
commitments in the social responsibility
contracts. Infrastructure such as roads and
houses built for their own use is allowed to fall
into disrepair as soon as they have logged out
a particular area, so that the forest-dwellers
receive little or no lasting material
compensation for the plunder of their
traditional territory.

Moreover, recent research conducted on
behalf of the Bank279 has highlighted the
inequitable nature both of the agreements and
of the process of negotiation by which they
are reached (see for example the Sodefor case
study on pp54–56 below). State authorities
often act on behalf of the logging companies
in the consultation process to ensure the
agreements are signed or to stifle protest.280

Certainly, the social responsibility contract
cannot be described as delivering genuine
poverty alleviation or even adequate service
provision, although, as the World Bank-led
forestry sector review acknowledges, it is
often the only benefit that forest communities
receive from industrial logging.

Nevertheless, although the Bank regards the
redistribution of the forest area tax to
provinces and territories as the chief means of
driving the DRC’s development, the Forestry
Code,281 drawn up according to the Bank’s
recommendations, formalises the practice of
negotiating social responsibility contracts
(Article 89).

Until now there has been no standard
procedure or template for the negotiation of
social responsibility contracts, a deficiency that
the Forestry Code sets out to remedy. New
social responsibility contracts will need to be
negotiated for logging titles that pass the legal
review.282 However, it is hard to see how
standardising this procedure through the
Forestry Code will overcome the intrinsic faults
of the process. Negotiations between
landowners and a logging company can deeply
divide communities, with landowners
sometimes granting access to the forest in
return for little beyond purely personal gifts for

‘The participatory

management approach that

is fashionable in some donor

and NGO circles has little

currency in the ruthless world

of industrial logging.

Moreover, the fiscal revenues

that should accrue to them

remain more imaginary then

real. These populations have

no reliable mediators &

insufficient experience in
participatory strategies.’277

Theodor Trefon, 2006

50

CARVING UP THE CONGO

©Greenpeace/Davison

TRANS-M’S DEALS ARE A ‘SWINDLE’

Trans-M’s illegal logging is
causing conflict in Lomako

Greenpeace has obtained a copy of a hand-
written a social responsibility contract that
Trans-M signed with the local community
leaders of Lomako on 8 February 2005.285
The communities live beside the newly
established (2006) Lomako National Park,
in key bonobo habitat within the CBFP
Maringa-Lopori-Wamba landscape. Trans-M
holds a title for the area obtained after the
moratorium (see pages 50–53).

The contract was negotiated in the presence
of many government representatives, including
the adviser to the governor and the regional
administrator. The contract commits Trans-M
to improve and maintain the local road, and to
build health centres and three schools. In terms
of more immediate compensation to the
community, Trans-M promised to deliver 20
50kg sacks of sugar, 200 bags of salt, and
equipment including 200 machetes, 50 axes,
100 hoes, 100 files and 200 spades. In July

2005, just six months after the contract was
signed, concerned members of the
community, organised under the name of the
Association of Natives of Lomako (Association
des Ressortissants de Lomako – ARELO)
handed over a memorandum286 to the
Governor of Equateur Province in which they
expressed their anger and frustration at the
‘illegal logging activities carried out by Trans-
M’.287 The memorandum was addressed to a
broad audience, including the Trans-M
management in Kinshasa, President Kabila and
the Environment Minister.

In the memorandum, ARELO claims that Trans-
M’s logging contract was signed in violation of
the moratorium, and also that ‘the logging title
Trans-M has obtained is located in a zone
where the creation of a future protected area
is being widely discussed.’ It complains that ‘no
proper land use planning was done … taking
into account the socio-economic realities of
the local communities’ and that ‘the people
were not properly consulted before this
logging title was handed out’.288 It also regrets

‘Villagers within 40 kilometres

of the city of Kisangani are

rising up against the logging

companies exploiting their

forests. According to village

leaders, their people are not

benefiting from these

industrial activities. Not a

single humanitarian or social

action has been taken by

these loggers. Villages are

without schools, health

centres, navigable roads and

other adequate infrastructure.

In short, in the majority of

cases, social responsibility

contracts have not been

respected … At present, the

most visible, the most active I

can cite include Trans-M Bois,

a subsidiary of Congo
Futur.’289

Radio Okapi, Kisangani

(April 2006)

the overlap of interests ‘between the head of
the provincial administration and the
company’.290

ARELO cites a number of shortcomings in
Trans-M’s handling of the social responsibility
contract process:291

s the lack of proper consultation of the people

of Lomako

s the poor content of the social responsibility
contract listing the obligations of the logging
company

s a questionable commitment to genuine
development as a result of the contract
having been negotiated by Trans-M in the
absence of any clear, informed
representation of community interests

s the fact that several village representatives

refused to be part of this swindle (‘tricherie’)
– which included ‘forgery and other defects
… evident in some of the signatures attached
to the document at the 8 February 2005
meeting, at which people were forced
to sign’292

The memorandum concludes by protesting
against the arrogant and disrespectful way the
negotiating process was conducted, against
the interests of the Lomako communities.293
ARELO calls for the ‘immediate and
unconditional suspension of Trans-M’s/Congo
Futur’s activities in this future protected area
because they do not meet the needs of the
local community’.294

The social conflicts arising from Trans-M’s
poor contribution to local development in the
Lomako area continue, two years on.

Trans-M workers complain of appalling
working conditions. Many workers have voiced
concern that they have no proper contract;
workers camps are unsanitary; the work can
be quite unsafe, and there have been a number
of fatal accidents for which relatives have not
received proper compensation. Those who
have challenged Trans-M about the situation
(village chiefs, local authorities, the local
forestry department) have complained about
intimidation.295

CARVING UP THE CONGO

51

©Greenpeace/Reynaers

‘Trans-M was imposed on

the community … The head

of the Department for the

Environment simply informed

the community that they

were going to log the
forest.’296

Alibuku community leader

Trans-M is destroying community
forest resources in Kisangani

Greenpeace has obtained a copy of another
social responsibility contract297 which Trans-
M negotiated in February 2005. This one is
with the community of Alibuku village, near
Kisangani in Orientale Province, impacted by
the GA 033/05 logging title.298 The
agreement includes commitments to build a
school and a clinic, to provide transport for
villagers to Kisangani if there is room in the
logging trucks, and to provide free wood to
use for coffins.

But implementation of these promises has
been disappointing. Apart from the
construction of a school, few of the promises
made to the community have materialised.
The company is the cause of considerable
tension in the area and risks damaging local
livelihoods.299 More than a year after the
contract was obtained by Greenpeace, a field
mission from the NGOs Bank Information
Center and Environmental Defense visited the
village and drew the following conclusions:

52

CARVING UP THE CONGO

©Greenpeace/Reynaers

‘The Bank’s actions in the DRC

industrial timber sector are

subject to some criticism. …

[T]here are serious ethical

considerations because there

is little doubt that local

populations will be victimised
by industrialised logging.’ 300

Theodor Trefon, 2006

‘The conditions under which cahiers des
charges are negotiated often do not enable
communities to adequately express and defend
their rights. In the case of Trans-M, the
company held one meeting with the
customary landowners (les ayants droits) and
the village chief (chef du village) to announce
that it would start working in the community.
The company then returned for a second
meeting, with the Government’s advisor, and
demanded that the community draft its
priorities and demands for the cahier des
charges and sign the document that same day
(February 2005). After more than a year, none
of the commitments made by the company in
the cahier des charges … has been fulfilled. The
villagers complained: “We asked them to
provide us with enough wood for our coffins
and they even refused that.”’301

As the BIC/ED report also emphasises, the
existence of a social responsibility contract
does not obviate the need for direct
compensation for the losses communities
experience as a result of forest destruction
from industrial logging. These losses can
include, amongst others, a decline in the
supply of or access to non-timber forest

products on which communities depend,
including mushrooms, caterpillars and forest
animals that are hunted.

Local communities that depend on the forest
currently being logged by Trans-M have
complained that the company is cutting down
sapele trees (see p 46). Communities rely on
these trees for caterpillars, an important
source of protein and cash in an area that
otherwise suffers from malnutrition. Further,
Trans-M’s logging operations overlap with,
and threaten to damage, areas used by
communities for small-scale agriculture.302

On 19 February 2005, Trans-M also obtained
an agreement from several neighbouring
communities.303 The negotiations over this
created considerable conflict; younger people
felt that elders had failed to look after the
long-term interests of the community. The
deal also created tensions between
communities, with some customary
landowners refusing to sign the social
responsibility contract because they felt the
content was weak and that their needs were
not adequately taken into account.

CARVING UP THE CONGO

53

©Greenpeace

Soon after, Trans-M began rapidly expanding
its logging operations at its GA 033/55 title,
the contract for which was signed after the
moratorium. Local radio reported that by
December 2005 more then 300 afrormosia
(Pericopsis elata) logs were being stored in
Kisangani awaiting shipment to Kinshasa.304

Afrormosia is a CITES Appendix II listed species,
which means that it is at risk of extinction
from unregulated trade and therefore subject
to regulation. If there is good reason to
question the legality of the timber, importing
EU countries have the duty under CITES
regulations to insist on clear evidence of
legality before issuing an import licence.

Further, local authorities have complained that
Trans-M is not following the regulations in
terms of log storage and fails to respect local
tax obligations. However, Trans-M has denied
the charges made by the provincial coordinator
for the Ministry of Environment and claims
that everything was arranged in Kinshasa.305

As the problems around Trans-M operations in
Lomako and Kisangani demonstrate, social
responsibility contracts do not ensure that
communities benefit from logging operations
or that forest resources are sustained.

Timber from Trans- M is imported into
European countries including Belgium, France
and Germany.306

EUROPEAN LAWS BANNING
ILLEGAL AFRORMOSIA
– WHERE’S THE ENFORCEMENT?

With an export market price of around
$850/m3 for sawn timber,307 afrormosia or
African teak (Pericopsis elata) ranks among the
most valued tropical timber species.
Afrormosia is a CITES Appendix II species,
meaning that the species is subject to trade
regulation because it is recognised that
unregulated trade puts the species at risk
of extinction.

The DRC has the world’s largest remaining
stocks of afrormosia, largely confined to the
provinces of Equateur and Orientale.308 Around
Kisangani, this threatened species is the main
commercial timber tree.309

Since the end of the war, the DRC has
substantially increased its exports of
afrormosia. In 2005/06, it was the world’s
largest exporter, with the vast majority of the
timber being exported to China, Taiwan and six
European destinations: Italy, France, Belgium,
Germany, Portugal and Switzerland. Other
destinations include Japan and the USA.310

In theory, DRC government authorities are
only allowed to grant a CITES Appendix II
export permit for afrormosia (whether logs,
sawn timber or veneer sheets) if two criteria
are met: 311

s the Institut des Jardins Zoologiques et
Botaniques du Congo (the DRC CITES
Scientific Authority) has advised that ‘such
export will not be detrimental to the survival
of that species’

s the Institut Congolais pour la Conservation

de la Nature (ICCN) (the DRC CITES
Management Authority) is ‘satisfied that the
specimen was not obtained in contravention
of the laws of that State for the protection
of fauna and flora? (eg not in violation of
the moratorium and compliant with the DRC
Forestry Code)

Additionally, countries within the European
Union may only issue an import permit for
afrormosia if such imports ‘would not have a
harmful effect on the conservation status of
the species or the territory occupied by the
relevant population of the species.’312

Using its additional power to enforce CITES
regulations, the European Union suspended
imports of afrormosia from Cameroon and the
Republic of Congo because of concerns about
the sustainability of the trade. Both sanctions
were subsequently lifted.313

Given the level of corruption within the DRC,
the extent of forest allocated in violation of
the 2002 moratorium and the Forestry Code,
the lack of institutional capacity to either
identify breaches of the law or enforce
regulations, and the clear incentive for
companies to cut the most valuable species
within the current legal vacuum, it is clear that
it will be very hard to prove the legality of
afrormosia from the DRC under the CITES
regulations.

54

CARVING UP THE CONGO

©Greenpeace/Davison

SODEFOR DEALS WITH
EMPTY WORDS

Sodefor (see page 23) has its operations
headquarters in Nioki in Bandundu Province.
The town is an example of modern industrial
logging’s inability to bring prosperity to the
regions in which it operates.

The example of Sodefor is all the more striking
in that the company’s pre-war predecessor,
the state-owned Forescom (run by Belgian,
then Canadian management) appears to have
been relatively beneficial. Sodefor (Société de
Développement Forestier known to local
inhabitants as ‘Société de Destruction
Forestière’) is now part of the giant
Liechtenstein-based NST group (see
pp82–85), which directly controls some
4.7 million hectares of logging titles in four
DRC provinces.314

Sodefor is by far the dominant logging
company in Bandundu, with a sawmill base at
Nioki, the only logging town in Bandundu
Province. Greenpeace visited the area in
May–June 2006 and January 2007, and was
told that local people have repeatedly
expressed their outrage at Sodefor’s
exploitative attitude.

For example, in an open letter to the Minister
of Environment, people from Nioki, who had
formed a pressure group under the name of
‘SOS Nioki’, complained about the company’s
disappointing social record:

‘The forests of Mai-Ndombé are exploited for
the self-interested profit of Sodefor and its sister
company Soforma … This exploitation generates
a huge turnover … and makes a dismal contrast
with the economic and social conditions of the
populace of Mai-Ndombé district … where there
is no sign of any recompense for the wealth
extracted from its land.

Logging titles near the Salonga-Lukenie-Sankura Landscape

CARVING UP THE CONGO

55

In contradiction of its full name, which
promises development, Sodefor has never
given a moment’s consideration to any
development project in this area.’315

to meet local demand. Sodefor has a
processing plant at Nioki, but according to local
people all the timber it processes is sold
elsewhere.316

It was indeed evident at the time of
Greenpeace’s visit that little of the wealth
Sodefor has extracted has returned to the
area. Sodefor’s main contribution to Nioki
seems to be the maintenance of the town’s
hospital which provides health care to its
inhabitants. The roads at Nioki, well maintained
before Sodefor bought out the logging
operation, are now in a state of disrepair. The
electricity supply to most of the town has
been cut off. Outside Nioki, most schools in
the area where Sodefor operates lack benches,
and most health centres lack basic medical
equipment. Sawn timber is hard to obtain in
the area – there is not a single timber yard in
the region where final processing is carried out

Beyond the town, villages close to sites where
Sodefor has ended its logging are now partly
abandoned, their inhabitants setting up in
shanty-towns along the river, the sole
remaining means of communication. As
elsewhere in the DRC, game and fish are
becoming rare in the area and, as there is little
agriculture, the population subsists largely on a
diet of manioc.

Greenpeace found similar deprivation and lack
of investment in basic infrastructure in other
nearby settlements where Sodefor is active.317

When Sodefor ‘negotiates’ social responsibility

SankuraRiverLukenie RiverSalongaRiverBokunguOshweIlebaDekeseITBSODEFORSODEFORSODEFORSODEFORSODEFORSODEFORSODEFORIntact ForestLandscapesSalonga-Lukenie-Sankura LandscapeLogging Titles56

CARVING UP THE CONGO

‘Forest laws must be

reformed to recognize the

needs of the forest-

dependent poor. Otherwise,

their enforcement is the

worst form of violation of
equity and justice.’318

Gerhard Dieterle, World Bank

Forests Advisor, 2006

©Greenpeace/Davison

agreements with villages, the company always
uses essentially the same standard contract:
local stakeholders, uninformed of their rights,
are told to ‘take it or leave it’.319 Sodefor then
obtains an official signature to ‘legalise’ the
agreement.320 Typically, in return for access to
a village forest the company will sign an
agreement involving direct gifts in kind to the
customary landowners (often to a value of less
than $100).321 In return, Sodefor insists that
the landowners must sign away their
community’s right to protest in any way
against the company’s activities. They are also
expected to assume responsibility for the
smooth functioning of the company’s logging
operation – in other words, take responsibility
for preventing obstruction or interference.

SODEFOR’S CONTRACTS OF SHAME

‘Mr [xxx] undertakes to avert or prevent any
kind of disturbance (barricades, uprising of the
population) of Sodefor’s forest exploitation.
He is in addition responsible for the smooth
functioning of activities at the logging
site, without however interfering in
working methods.’322
Sodefor cahier de charge

Greenpeace has obtained copies of several of
Sodefor’s social responsibility agreements,
detailing the ‘gifts’ the community receives in
exchange for essentially signing away its right
to protest:

21 March 2004, Ikole Mete: two sacks of salt,
18 bars of soap, four packets of coffee, 24
bottles of beer and two bags of sugar.

18 March 2005, Bonji: one sack of salt, nine
bars of soap, two packets of coffee, 12 bottles
of beer, 1 bag of sugar.

1 November 2005, Nkoba & Manya: two sacks
of salt, 18 bars of soap, four packets of coffee,
24 bottles of beer and two bags of sugar.

Beyond its gifts to the local customary
landowners (‘ayants droits’), Sodefor typically
signs social responsibility agreements
promising to undertake development projects
for the benefit of the wider community. But
these rarely materialise, and villagers are
powerless to enforce the agreements. Madjoko
villagers receive a tiny percentage of the value
of the wood felled by the company, but have
to rely on the ‘totally unverified’ data which it
provides.323

Providing employment for local people would
be one benefit that the logging industry could
bring to forest communities. Yet, in Madjoko
and elsewhere, it was made clear to
Greenpeace that Sodefor provides few jobs for
local people. Additionally, some of those who
are taken on tend to be kept for unreasonably
long times as ‘trainees’ with no job security
and no rights to the bonuses received by the
non-local workers on full contracts, receiving
the national minimum wage (335 CFR per day
– about US$0.70) for a 10-hour day. Those
who are employed live in appalling
conditions.324 At various logging sites, an
investigation into the implementation of social
responsibility contracts notes that the level of
malnutrition and hunger, is striking.325 Even
the operations manager admitted that ‘lack of
food at Madjoko is a reality’.

Protests by local people at Sodefor’s failure to
abide by its commitments in social
responsibility contracts have met with violent
intervention from the police and military. In
2005, 23 people were arrested in the villages
of Bobila and Mbelo in Equateur Province for
blocking the road to prevent the passage of
logging equipment, after Sodefor failed to
respect a social responsibility agreement.326
In February 2006, soldiers and police returned
to Mbelo, making violent arrests and stealing
personal effects after villagers again blocked
the road.327

1 November 2005, Eyongo & Elona: two sacks
of salt, 18 bars of soap, four packets of coffee,
24 bottles of beer and two bags of sugar.

Timber from Sodefor is imported into
European countries, including Belgium, France,
Germany and Portugal.328

CARVING UP THE CONGO

57

THE LAW WORKS HAND-IN-HAND
WITH SICOBOIS

Sicobois is a Belgian-owned company with
three logging titles in Equateur Province,
covering nearly 400,000 hectares.329 These
contracts have been signed after the
moratorium. Although Sicobois had logging
titles in Lissala before May 2002, Greenpeace
has reason to believe that old forest areas
titles were exchanged for new ones.330
However, in the absence of publicly available
company-specific pre- and post-moratorium
maps, it is impossible to make a fully informed
independent judgement.

A report by a Congolese NGO331 states that
Sicobois often consults with local communities
regarding authorisation for forestry
prospecting, and it has negotiated and signed a
number of agreements. However, in most
cases these consultations and agreements
have not led to harmonious relations.

One agreement was concluded between
Sicobois and three community groups
(Bolongo-Bosua, Monduga and Bobala) on 16
January 2004.332 The company agreed to
supply the three communities with a quantity
of various tools and materials, and also to build
a dispensary and a school, renovate another
school, and supply benches for these and two
other existing schools.

On 3 October 2005, an ongoing conflict around
forest exploitation between the community of
Bolongo-Bosuwa and Sicobois seriously
escalated, with the company categorically
refusing the community’s request to negotiate
a new agreement to log its forests. According
to an article in La Voix du Paysan newspaper,
the Belgian Ambassador offered to negotiate
but this was rejected by Sicobois. The
community decided to block the roads to the
logging sites and deny the company’s vehicles
entrance to ‘their’ forests.333

This article goes on to state that Sicobois did
not respond to the community’s invitation to
negotiate a peaceful solution. However, three
officials, including a police officer, left Lisala for
the ‘conflict zone’ the same day. On their
arrival they arrested the chief of the
community and four of his councillors. All of
them were taken to prison and detained for six
days. Another councillor went up to Lisala the
same day to inform the coordinator of a local

NGO about the situation. When he returned
that evening to tell the community what had
become of the arrested men, he came across a
car full of Sicobois workers who were on their
way to remove the blockades to the logging
site. He was forced into the car and that night
they took him all the way back to Lisala to
have him put in prison as well (simply because
he had come back to the community to tell the
people what had happened to their chief and
councillors). The prosecutor who subsequently
examined the case concluded that the chief of
the community should never have been
intimidated in this manner.334

Nor was this an isolated incident. In the
neighbouring community of Mondunga, a
roadblock was set up by the local population in
order to insist that the logging company
respect its commitments. As a result of this
blockade, the president of the local
community’s committee on forest
management, Professor Wale, was reportedly
arrested in Lisala and spent two weeks in
prison.335 The evidence suggests that when
faced with protests at its conduct, Sicobois
prefers to leave it to the police to intimidate
communities rather than talk through the
difficulties – perhaps because negotiation
would force the company to admit that it fails
to abide by its local agreements.

Sicobois exports its timber to Europe, Danzer
is a major client of the company.336

58

CARVING UP THE CONGO

INDUSTRIAL LOGGING OPENS UP INTACT RAINFORESTS,
PRECLUDING PROPER LAND USE PLANNING
The World Bank’s strategy for reform of the
forestry sector in the DRC includes as a goal
protection of the rainforest’s local and global
environmental values, including its contribution
to climate stability.337 However, without a
forest land use planning process which
prioritises large-scale conservation, the
measures the World Bank has pushed through
– a moratorium on the allocation of new forest
titles, a legal review of existing titles, and a
new Forestry Code – will not stop industrial
logging moving into valuable intact rainforest.
This will result in de facto land use decisions in
favour of the loggers rather than the forest-
dwelling communities, the DRC’s unique
biodiversity or the global environment.

Many logging companies whose operations
threaten important forest landscapes have
rushed to obtain logging titles in advance of
any land use planning process (eg Trans-M
case study on pages 50–53). It is clear that in
this context there is an urgent need for full and
extensive land use planning prior to the
expansion of industrial logging: social and
environmental values need to be recognised
and protected so that critical areas of
rainforest are placed off limits to commercial
logging or other extractive industries. Strategic
land use planning provides an essential
framework for long-term management of any
forest. It has been shown to be effective at
resolving existing disputes and avoiding future
conflicts between the interests of indigenous
peoples, logging companies, biodiversity and
the environment at the local, national and
international scales.

In practice, however, just the opposite
approach is being taken: existing titles,
provided they satisfy the narrow criteria of the
legal review, stand to be confirmed as new-
style forestry concessions irrespective of their
potential impacts on forest-dwellers, wildlife
or climate, pre-empting any attempt at a
rational land use planning exercise with
irreversible decisions in favour of the logging
industry.

Meanwhile, the protection of the rainforest’s
social and environmental values will be largely
abandoned to the good offices of the logging
industry itself through the forest management
plans it is required to develop, four years down
the line. Rather than insisting first on land use
planning being the absolute priority, donors are
aiding and abetting this free-for-all by giving
companies development money to complete
these management plans, which being
mandatory are critical to their expansion into
new areas of intact forest – and to their
profitability (see case study, page 45).

The rainforest of the DRC is critical to the
health of the global environment. Its massive
stores of carbon help keep the global climate
stable. It plays a significant role in regulating
one of the world’s largest river basins. It is also
a unique reservoir of biodiversity.338 Once lost,
the forest, its wildlife and the vital environmental
services it provides cannot be replaced.

The CBFP has to date identified several large
forest landscapes within the DRC that are
important for conservation and require
sustainable management. Moreover, as shown
by the case of the Lomami forest (see
pp64–67), there are also other vast tracts
of intact forest landscape not included in the
CBFP’s priority conservation areas, that
nevertheless have huge value for forest
communities and biodiversity, and whose
large-scale protection would contribute to the
forest’s continued provision of global
environmental services such as climate
stability. But destructive logging operations are
set to go ahead both within the CBFP priority
landscapes (in spite of the CBFP’s
recommendations to aim for sustainable forest
management) and in other important areas,
curtailing the options for protection and
responsible forest management.

As the World Bank itself recognises: ‘There is a
serious risk that economic development
initiatives will be accepted by the Government
without adequate consideration being given to
their environmental impact, or to alternative
options such as biodiversity conservation and
community based management.’339

‘With the largest share of the

Congo Basin and 50% of

Africa’s moist tropical forests,

the occurrence of 12

ecoregions on DRC’s territory

and a unique level of natural

habitats and species diversity

and endemism, the DRC is

recognised as one of the

world’s most important

countries for environmental
protection.’340

World Bank, 2006

‘Independent of their species

richness and their level of

endemism, the forests of the

Congo Basin represent one of

the last regions in the world

with vast areas of

interconnected tropical

rainforest where the biological

processes can still proceed

without disturbance. It is for

example one of the rare

places in the world where an

animal the size of the forest

elephant can still play a

natural role in shaping its

ecosystem, like an “engineer”

transforming the landscape,

influencing species

distribution and maintaining

the functioning of natural

ecological systems. In

addition, simply by virtue of

its size, the forest of the

Congo Basin constitutes a

carbon reserve of global

importance for the regulation

of the principal greenhouse

gas, carbon dioxide. Finally,

this forest also has a role in

regulating the regional and

local climate. In particular it

ensures the hydrological

cycle, since more than 50%

of the precipitation that falls

on the Congo Basin comes

from local evaporation and
evapotranspiration.’341

Congo Basin Forest

Partnership, 2006

©Greenpeace/Davison

60

CARVING UP THE CONGO

©Greenpeace/Davison

‘The Democratic Republic of

Congo is by far the most

biologically rich country in

Africa … Its size and wide

range of habitats make it one

of the world’s most important
centres of biodiversity.342

Wildlife Conservation Society

(WCS)

The DRC’s resurgent logging industry is already
fragmenting large areas of rainforest, opening
them up to poachers, agriculture and
settlement as it creams off the most valuable
species. Poachers take advantage of the
logging roads to travel deep into previously
inaccessible forest. According to the CBFP, the
location of logging titles is a prime indicator of
where roads will be built, and roads are in turn
a prime indicator of where degradation of the
rainforests will occur in the future.343 Logging
company workers often facilitate the trade by
transporting bushmeat in company vehicles or
on log barges.344 In this way, even where the
forest cover remains largely intact, industrial
logging can lead to the near eradication of
endangered animal species from a region. In
the words of Conservation International, ‘This
type of uncontrolled bushmeat trade has
become the most immediate threat to the
future of wildlife in the Central African
wilderness in the next five to fifteen years.’345

LARGE INTACT RAINFORESTS –
DRC FORESTS ARE CRUCIAL
FOR GLOBAL BIODIVERSITY
CONSERVATION

The forests of the DRC are of global
significance for biodiversity conservation –
in fact, the country ranks as the fifth most
diverse country on earth for both plant and
animal species,346 in large part because of the
size and variety of forest habitats.347 The DRC
is home to a wider variety of species of
animals then any other nation in Africa and
only South Africa rivals the DRC in number of
plant species.348

The DRC’s vast tracts of unbroken forest
shelter spectacular mammals such as elephant
(Loxodonta africana), gorilla (Gorilla gorilla)
and buffalo (Syncerus caffer). These large
mammals play a critical role in shaping the
forests. Like landscape gardeners, they create
pathways, plant, prune, and open clearings.349

All four African great apes live in the DRC’s
forests: in addition to the western gorilla, we
find the eastern gorilla (Gorilla beringei), the
chimpanzee (Pan troglodytes) and the pygmy
chimpanzee or bonobo (Pan paniscus), the
human race’s closest relative, which lives
nowhere in the world except the rainforests
south of the Congo River.350

Other wonderful creatures that live only in the
DRC include the magnificent and elusive
Congo peacock (Afropavo congensis);351 the
rare aquatic genet (Osbornictis piscivora), a
curious fish-eating carnivore;352 the shy okapi
(Okapia johnstoni), a unique animal somewhere
between a giraffe and a zebra; and a number
of monkey species including the Salonga or
dryas monkey (Cercopithecus dryas),353 and
the golden-bellied mangabey (Cercocebus
chrysogaster).354

CARVING UP THE CONGO

61

‘The construction of logging

roads greatly increases access

to remote areas of forest but

unless use of these roads is

controlled during and after

logging, they significantly

increase unsanctioned

extractive activities such as

elephant poaching,

commercialization of the

bushmeat trade, and

exploitation of minerals, all of

which have severe

environmental impacts. The

devastating effects of

unregulated hunting have

been well documented in

Central Africa, where many

logged forests remain filled

with trees but are empty of

wildlife—the “silent forest”

syndrome. Logging roads also

serve as conduits for

immigration and forest-
clearing for agriculture.’368

Wildlife Conservation Society,

2004

‘Without a forest land use

planning process that will lead

to a protected permanent

forest estate, the Congolese

forest by 2050 will only be a

vague reminder of what they
once were.’369

World Bank, 2005

to poachers, jeopardising the future of some of
its most endangered species. Roads also
degrade the forest, contributing to climate
change through emission of greenhouse gases.

The potential consequences of this expansion
of logging operations are recognised in a
report on Siforco’s activities, which
acknowledges that the forest authorities
responsible for wildlife management in the
region are utterly incapable of exerting the
necessary control to protect wildlife from the
impacts of logging.362 Instead, independent
conservation groups are left to try to manage
the problem created by industrial logging as
best they can, employing only a handful of
rangers to cover an area of some 720,000
hectares!363 Clearly such a level of
enforcement is totally inadequate to control
poaching. It is doubtful that any practically
conceivable level of enforcement will be able
to control poaching once the area has been
opened up because of the vast area affected.
Once open, Siforco’s holdings are likely to end
up as ‘empty forest’, devoid of large animals
like other areas which logging has opened up
to poaching and other forms of exploitation.

Near Befale, south of the Lomako reserve in
core bonobo habitat is another big actor,
Trans-M. According to CBFP, Trans-M’s
250,000 hectare logging title364 (see page
50–53) was obtained in breach of the
moratorium365 and therefore the Forestry
Code. While there are many indications that
Trans-M is involved in illegal activities, the
forestry authorities in Equateur have no proper
control or monitoring of the volume of timber
the company logs.366 As a report by the CBFP
notes in relation to logging in this area: ‘When
those responsible for governance and
conservation are absent, those involved in
logging the forest are given a free rein for
lawless exploitation.’367

NO LAND USE PLANNING IS
A ROAD TO RUIN – LOGGING
IN THE MARINGA-LOPORI-WAMBA
LANDSCAPE

In September 2003, the World Bank set out to
support pilot forest zoning work in the
Maringa-Lopori-Wamba landscape (one of the
CBFP’s key conservation landscapes) as part of
a $4 million emergency aid loan. However, it
then dropped the project because of lack
of consultation.355

It is unclear if and how the World Bank will re-
engage in zoning activities. In response to a
joint letter from Greenpeace, Bank Information
Center, Environmental Defense and the
Rainforest Foundation, in November 2006 the
World Bank wrote in November 2006 that: ‘A
participatory zoning activity might be part of
future projects financed or administered by the
Bank, as long as there is unambiguous support
for it within the Congolese civil society, and
provided national technical institutions
demonstrate commitment to exercise due
diligence in handling such a complex task.’356

Within the Maringa-Lopori-Wamba landscape,
Siforco (part of the Danzer group) is by far the
largest logging title holder (see pages 82-85).

Siforco started logging in the area in 1977.357
In June 2004, the company returned 1.2
million hectares of forest to the State, around
half of it within the Maringa-Lopori-Wamba
Landscape. Yet, only forests which had already
been logged or which were otherwise
unsuitable for industrial exploitation were
handed back. 358 Further, this relieved Siforco
of paying imminent increases in annual forest
tax on the area returned.359

Siforco currently holds two adjacent dormant
logging areas in the landscape, known as K2
and K7. These cover 725,000 hectares of
rainforest within the boundaries of the
landscape,360 north of the Lomako national
park and in bonobo habitat. The company
intends to open several of these areas as soon
as it finalises its management plans for the
areas and has the necessary infrastructure in
place.361 Opening up these vast tracts of
rainforest with thousands of kilometres of
logging trails and roads will cause not only
direct habitat destruction and disturbance of
wildlife, but will also further open up the forest

‘As USAID has long

recognized, donors encounter

extreme difficulty and little

success in trying to use

foreign assistance (grants

and loans) to impose new

behavioural norms in political

systems based on the

“rule of men” rather than
the “rule of law”.’ 377

ARD report for USAID, 2003

62

CARVING UP THE CONGO

©Mauthe/Greenpeace

The coordinator of forestry for Equateur
Province at Mbandaka told Greenpeace in
October 2006370 that although he has had
reports that there are problems with Trans-M,
he does not have the resources to investigate
the matter. The local forestry authority at
Befale – even more poorly resourced than its
provincial head office – is largely cut off from
the supervision of the provincial coordinator,
although he is ‘aware’ that the branch has
problems, such as low wages, no transport and
no proper equipment, which makes it
extremely dependent on the good will of
companies such as Trans-M.

Representatives of the Ministry of
Development are also present in Befale,
but they too are without capacity, skills
or equipment.

In the absence of strategic zoning, in a context
of corruption and weak institutional capacity,
de facto land use planning is rapidly taking
place through the expansion of destructive
logging practices. This happens even in areas
already identified by the international
community as priority areas for conservation
and responsible management.

WILL DONORS’ SUBSIDIES
SUPPORT THE ROAD-TO-RUIN
POLICY?

In the absence of land use planning and
governance, the emphasis of the World Bank’s
strategy to drive development for the people
of the DRC has shifted from attempts to
control the resurgence of the logging
industry’s operations (eg through the
moratorium and legal review) to attempts to
control its social and environmental impacts
through the development of forest
management plans.

In February 2007, international donors
attending a conference on the DRC were asked
to help logging companies with the cost of
doing business in Central Africa. The head of
the Interafrican Forest Industries Association
(IFIA)371 – which represents some 300
companies in the Ivory Coast, Ghana,
Cameroon, Gabon, the Central African
Republic, the Republic of the Congo, the DRC
and Angola – asked for ¤75 million to
subsidise the cost of developing forest
management plans.372

Despite the complete lack of institutional
capacity in the DRC, the French and German
Governments accordingly intend to provide
public money to support the preparation of
forest management plans for the DRC
operations of Danzer’s Siforco (see pages
82–85). The German development bank KfW
is looking to support development of a forest
management plan for titles within Siforco’s K8
holding.373 The French development
corporation Agence Française de
Développement (AFD) is considering financial
support for development of a forest
management plan for titles within Siforco’s K9
holding.274 Logging may start in 2007 in these
areas. It is highly questionable whether an
international company, with an annual turnover
of over ¤400 million,375 should benefit from
foreign aid assistance in a country where
people are still dying from starvation, and
where corruption and institutional incapacity
are major hurdles to progress.

Siforco is currently the largest timber producer
in the DRC, producing some 90,000m3 of
timber in 2005 – more than 20% of the entire
industrial timber production for that year.376

Logging titles near the Maringa–Lopori–Wamba Landscape

CARVING UP THE CONGO

63

Its current logging operations take no account
of sustainability parameters: timber production
is dictated in response to industrial demand of
Danzer’s sawmills.378

Siforco’s logging activities are currently within
the most productive intact forest areas within
its titles, which hold the highest densities of
valuable hardwood. Titles have been logged
solely with a view to efficient extraction of key
species.379 In 2005, just three species –
sapele, iroko (Milicia excelsa) and sipo
(Entandrophragma utile) – made up 63% of
the total volume logged.380 This practice of
high grading inevitably leads to a need to move
on rapidly to new areas of intact forest.381

Given the desperate shortage of institutional
capacity in the DRC’s forestry service,

combined with the absence of a land use
planning process, this at best a highly
questionable use of taxpayers’ money.

French and German government funding for
Siforco to meet statutory commitments would
give the company a competitive advantage,
and facilitate the expansion of industrial
logging operations into intact forest
landscapes. This would contribute to
undermining the future potential of the DRC
to protect its biodiversity and its continued
provision of global climate services.

Timber from Siforco is imported into European
countries including Belgium, Denmark, France,
The Netherlands and the UK. It is also imported
into China.382

SOFORMASIFORCOK8SIFORCOK9CFTSIFORCOK2SIFORCOK7SEDAFSEDAFTRANS-MFORABOLATRANS-MTRANS-MSODEFORSEDAFFORABOLASOFORMASODEFORCFTSIFORCOK9SOFORMASICOBOISSIFORCOK8SIFORCOK9BefaleDjolaCongoRiverLopori RiverMaringa RiverIntact ForestLandscapesMaringa-Lopori-WambaLandscapeLogging Titles64

CARVING UP THE CONGO

TIME FOR LARGE-SCALE
RAINFOREST CONSERVATION
BEFORE THE CRISIS:
LOOMING THREATS FOR
THE LOMAMI FOREST

BEYOND PAPER PARKS AND
EMPTY FORESTS

Although theoretically there are 60 protected
areas in the DRC (including seven national
parks), covering 18.5 million hectares or 8% of
the country,383 many of these areas are
protected only on paper.384 All five Natural
World Heritage Sites (four of them also national
parks) are listed by UNESCO as ‘World heritage
in danger’,385 despite the dedication of ICCN
staff who continued management activities
throughout the war with financial support from
UNESCO and international NGOs. Two-thirds of
the parks have been all but emptied of large
mammals.386 As elsewhere in the world, the
historic approach to biodiversity protection
based on islands of protected habitat has not
been enough to safeguard the country’s wildlife
against pressure from a growing population,387
poaching and other threats which industrial
logging looks set to exacerbate, both directly
by the damage it causes, and indirectly as a
result of the roads and other infrastructure it
brings into the forest.

The World Bank acknowledges that the
existing protected areas are inadequate:

‘The current network of protected areas with
only 7 national parks and 57 nature and
hunting reserves is insufficient to conserve the
uniqueness of biodiversity in the DRC;
additional protected areas need to be created
to achieve the mandate of conserving
representative ecosystems found in the DRC,
preserving endemic species, protecting intact
fauna assemblages, maintaining a viable long
term population of unique fauna and flora
species and finally preserving the functionality
of key ecosystem services for the benefit of
economic development and human welfare.’388

Accordingly, the Forestry Code sets a target
of at least 15% of the national territory –
ie 35 million hectares – to be protected, an
increase of 16.5 million hectares over the
present figure.389 From the point of view of
biodiversity protection, this is an ambitious
and necessary goal.

In April 2006, Greenpeace field investigators
visited the Lomami forest (strictly known as
the Lomami-Tshuapa-Lualaba forest block,
from the three rivers that form the main
geographic features in this vast block of
lowland rainforest). Our own observations
and interviews with local hunter-gatherer
pygmy communities confirmed that the area
is still rich in wildlife – indeed it is the only
place where all three of the DRC’s endemic
‘flagship species’ occur together: the okapi,
the bonobo and the Congo peacock.
Greenpeace also saw evidence of forest
elephants, leopards (Panthera pardus), forest
buffalos, a number of other primates, crowned
eagles (Stephanoaetus coronatus) and an
abundance of hornbills (Bucerotidae).

The Lomami area is probably the largest area
of unprotected intact lowland rainforest in the
DRC or even in the entire Congo region,
covering over 1.2 million hectares.390 The
region supports hunter-gatherer communities,
who depend on hunting, fishing, and some
small-scale slash-and-burn agriculture. Partly
as a result of its sheer size, which allows space
for large mammals to range, coupled with low
population pressure, the Lomami forest is a
vital area for biodiversity conservation.

The Lomami forest has been proposed as a
protected area by the Congolese Institute for
Nature Conservation (ICCN) and the World
Bank is considering funding this.391 No logging
titles have been allocated within the heart of
the area as yet, but there are some which abut
it, many of them with contracts signed after
the moratorium. Contracts include Safbois’ GA
034/04 and GA 091/03 at Isangi near the
mouth of the Lomami river, Olam’s GA 048/05
west of the Lomami forest block near Ubundu,
and Sodefor’s GA 018/03 near Ubundu (see
map page 65).392

There is a real danger of future forestry
expansion in the area, since the rivers are
mainly navigable, making the forests highly
accessible. For example, Safbois’ intention to
build a sawmill in the area could lead to
pressure for expansion into the Lomami forest
once the existing titles in the vicinity are
logged out.393

©Greenpeace/Davison

‘In Central Africa, with the

exception of the Democratic

Republic of Congo, almost all

land outside national parks

has been either zoned for

logging or already issued as
logging concessions.’394

Conservation

International,2006

‘Failure from the international

community to at least share

the cost of managing parks

may discourage the DRC

from keeping these areas

exempt from extractive
industries.’395

World Bank, 2006

Logging titles near
Tshuapa-Lomami-
Lualaba Landscape

CARVING UP THE CONGO 65

SAFBOIS IS LURKING AT THE
MOUTH OF THE LOMAMI

Safbois is part of the US-owned Blattner
group.396 According to a report for USAID, the
company resumed operations in the DRC
during 2002, while conflict was still
widespread, and ‘a SAFBOIS barge was
reportedly among the first to move back up
the Congo River since the outbreak of the civil
war in 1998. It carried supplies for loggers in
Bumba and was scheduled to return with over
7,000 tons of hardwoods.’397

Since 2004, Safbois' main logging operation
has been located near Isangi in Orientale
Province. The company was also active near

Bolobo in Bandundu Province until June 2005,
at which point it ceased operations, leaving no
sustainable infrastructure behind.398

A Greenpeace mission in October 2005 to the
company's operations in Isangi at the mouth of
the Lomami river found serious conflict with
local communities. Many of the people
Greenpeace spoke to complained that Safbois
had not implemented its social responsibility
contract, signed 15 September 2004, which
included promises to build a school. They also
claimed that Safbois had started prospecting
for trees even before it had negotiated with
the villagers. They expressed their anger at the
company's refusal to compensate villagers for

Lomami RiverCongo River(Lualaba)TshuapaRiverSOFORMASODEFORCFTSAFBOISOLAM(INDICATIVE)KisanganiOpalaUbunduIsangiKinduIntact Forest LandscapesLogging Titles66

CARVING UP THE CONGO

damage it had caused. Safbois logging
infrastructure developments has destroyed
agricultural fields and fruit trees used by local
people, and the demolition of a local market
place to create timber port.399

Isangi locals employed by Safbois testified to
the unhealthy housing conditions and lack of
clean sanitation on site, as well as the high
number of employees without permanent
contracts.400 Due to the malnutrition in the
area, aid organisations are developing food
projects in the area.401

There have been several protests by villagers
against Safbois' operation in Isangi.402 These
have been prompted by Safbois' failure to
deliver the assets agreed in the social
responsibility contract;403 the perceived
collusion between the company, their own
chiefs and the local authorities, including the
provincial governor;404 and confusion about
the boundaries of Safbois’ logging

CHECKLIST OF KEY GOVERNANCE, SOCIAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL RISKS OF INDUSTRIAL LOGGING COMPANIES
Holder

Capital

Titles in
legal review
(total & hectares)

Titles
Granted
after May 2002
moratorium
(total & hectares)

Titles
located in
Intact Forest
Landscapes

Titles
Threatening
Identified
Conservation
Landscapes

Blattner Group -

SAFBOIS

Belgium/USA

2

2

3

9

4

2

334,700

358,000

2

2

334,700

1 + 1?

358,000

746,000

3

746,000

2+ 1

1,927,726

665,904

373,000

6

3

2

1,182,240

9

3

518,904

1 + 2?

373,000

1

Lebanon

Germany

Lebanon

CFBC

Congo Futur -
TRANS-M

Danzer Group -

SIFORCO

ITB SPRL

LEDYA SPRL

NordSudTimber

(CFT, Forabola,
Sodefor & Soforma)

Portugal

37

4,662,902 36

4,505,902

26 + 1?

14

OLAM CONGO

India-Singapore

SICOBOIS

Belgium

3

3

305,700

3

305,700

394,750    3

394,750

3?

3?

1

3?

TOTAL

65 9,768,682    60    8,719,196

Titles
located
in CITES
Afrormosia
Landscape

2

8

1

14

1

3?

CARVING UP THE CONGO

67

‘Deforestation of Amazonia

and Central Africa severely

reduces rainfall in the lower

US Midwest during the spring

and summer seasons and in

the upper US Midwest during

the winter and spring,

respectively, when water is

crucial for agricultural

productivity in these
regions.’422

Roni Avissar and David Werth,

2005

operation.405 As a result of these protests, the
regional administrator detained five of the
demonstrators.406

The social unrest related to Safbois’s poor
social record in Isangi continues. In an open
letter to Safbois dated 5 March 2007, four
elected parliamentarians (députés provincaux
elus à Isangi) called for the suspension of
Safbois’s activities until the company has
fulfilled its promises and until new negotiations
have taken place.407

Greenpeace investigations show that Safbois
logs significant quantities of the CITES
Appendix II listed species afrormosia (see box
on page 53).408

Safbois exports timber (including afrormosia)
to Europe and Asia.409

Even without such expansion, the presence of
logging areas adjacent to the Lomami forest is
likely to exacerbate the already serious
problem of poaching for bushmeat and ivory,
both by increasing immediate local demand for
meat and by opening up the surrounding area
with logging roads and increasing river traffic,
thus facilitating the transport of ivory and of
bushmeat for commercial sale.

In the face of these threats, there is a clear and
urgent need to proceed with formal protection
of the whole Lomami forest area, before the
allocation of new logging concessions can begin
to chip away at it, destroying its integrity and
leaving only disjointed ‘leftovers’ to be
designated for conservation. Such designation
should be based on biodiversity studies and
fully take into account the needs of local
forest-dwelling communities – and it must
exclude industrial extractive industries. This
approach must be backed up with adequate
monitoring and enforcement to prevent illegal
logging and poaching. This will require a
substantial financial commitment from
international donors.

In Lomami the DRC still has a unique
opportunity to protect a substantial block of
lowland rainforest that will not only help secure
the future of some of the region’s most
important wildlife but will also continue to
provide an important buffer against further
acceleration of climate change. This
opportunity must not be allowed to slip away.

REMAINING INTACT –
CONSERVING DRC RAINFORESTS
IS A CLIMATE IMPERATIVE
Forests are vital in regulating the climate –
locally, regionally and globally. The DRC’s
intact rainforests act as a regulator of rainfall
for the region. Moreover they act as a brake
on further acceleration of climate change by
serving as a vast carbon reserve. While the
stakes are incalculably high in terms of
biodiversity within the DRC, there is also
clearly an urgent need to protect its
tropical forests in order to maintain their
carbon stocks.410

Forests store half of the earth’s terrestrial
carbon stock,411 more than any other
ecosystem.412 The amount of carbon stored in
the world’s forests is 45 times the amount
emitted every year through burning of fossil
fuels and the production of cement.413 With
its immense areas of intact rainforests, the
DRC holds 8% of that part of the earth’s
carbon which is stored in living forests.414 This
is more than any other country in Africa, and is
estimated to have the fourth highest national
store of forest carbon in the world.415

Carbon emissions from deforestation
When forests are completely cleared – for
instance, to make way for agriculture
plantations or grazing – up to half the carbon
they held may be emitted into the
atmosphere.416 Even selective logging, as
generally practised in the DRC and elsewhere
in Central Africa, can have a serious carbon
impact, as explained below. Although the
amount of carbon held in African forests varies
with the type of forest, the biomass of
lowland rainforest – the type of forest most at
risk from deforestation in DRC – is estimated
to hold 180 tonnes of carbon per hectare.417
Lowland tropical rainforests store more living
carbon per hectare than other forest types.418

Deforestation causes these stores of carbon
to be emitted into the atmosphere as carbon
dioxide (CO2) where they contribute to climate
change. On an annual basis, global emissions
from tropical deforestation alone contribute
between 10% and 25% of total human-induced
CO2 emissions to the atmosphere,419 roughly
equal to that produced by the global transport
sector.420 For the DRC, cumulative carbon
emissions from deforestation from 1950-2000
were over 50 times those from burning
fossil fuels.421

68

CARVING UP THE CONGO

Carbon missions from fragmentation
and degradation
It is not only the direct effects of deforestation
that causes losses of forest carbon to the
atmosphere: indirect effects are also
important. At present, the global figures used
by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC), as well as those used in the UK
Government’s recently published Stern Review
Report on the economics of climate change,
exclude emissions resulting from the
fragmentation of vast areas of intact forests
into smaller areas423 – for example by logging
roads. Trees on the edges of such fragments
are vulnerable to drought, wind and fire,424 all
of which can result in death and the release of
stored carbon. In addition, many trees are
inadvertently damaged, even during selective
logging. Similarly, only a small fraction of cut
wood ends up stored in houses or other long-
lasting structures which store carbon; the
majority of carbon is lost to the atmosphere
though the decay or burning of waste.425
These effects combined can be highly
important, and are estimated as being just as
important in terms of carbon emissions as the
direct impacts, if not more so.426

©Kim Gjerstad

If left to proceed unhindered, forest regrowth
would eventually (over centuries, rather than
decades) recapture the carbon lost through
fragmentation and degradation. In the
meantime, however, this carbon is in the
atmosphere, contributing to climate change. In
any case, agriculture, rather than forest
regrowth, tends to follow degradation in many
cases, and since crops unlike forests do not
accumulate large amounts of carbon and store
it for long periods, so most of the carbon
emitted through deforestation, fragmentation
and degradation will be permanently lost into
the atmosphere.

Using satellite data, Greenpeace has
conservatively predicted the overall carbon
emissions from a 170,000-hectare area logged
by Siforco between 1981and 1998, extracting
some 900,000m3 of commercial logs (see box
below).427 The company cleared over 4,000
hectares of lowland rainforest to create a mass
network of feeder logging roads and log
storage facilities. The potential emissions from
forest fragmentation as a result of this
infrastructure were nearly 2.5 times greater
than, and in addition to, those created by
actually extracting the commercial logs. The

total emissions were 5,183,827 CO2. Given
that nearly forty million hectares of intact
rainforests are currently allocated to industrial
logging across Central Africa,428 (another ten
million is in already fragmented areas),429 this
study suggests a significant impact when
scaled up across the whole region.

Estimates of the social cost of carbon
emissions can vary considerably. The 2006
Stern Review Report does not arrive at a firm
figure, but on the basis of what the review
panel describes as preliminary work, it
estimates that if we aim for the recommended
target of no more than 550 parts per million of
CO2 in the atmosphere, the social cost of
carbon emissions would start in the region of
$25-30/tonne of CO2, increasing in time as
the concentration of greenhouse gases
increases and, with it, the effect of adding
each further tonne. The figure of about $25
per tonne is already higher than some other
estimates, as the latest scientific evidence
warns us that global warming will be greater
than was previously thought.430

Forests are important for climate not only in
terms of carbon emissions, but also in terms of
rainfall. The effect of deforestation on rainfall is

CARVING UP THE CONGO

69

‘Forests store nearly half of

the globe’s terrestrial carbon.

The atmosphere is heating up

with unknown and potentially

terrible consequences. That is

what independent scientific

panels are telling us. We

cannot ignore this warning.

But the world also needs to

acknowledge more concretely

the significant role African

forest management and

development can play in

mitigating climate change.

We have not done that

yet either politically
or financially.’439

Odin Knudsen, World Bank

Senior Adviser, 2003

particularly marked in Africa since 75–95 % of
the rainfall in the Congo Basin derives from
water recycling.431 Logging of large
concessions can thus affect rainfall in
surrounding forest areas.432 On the global
scale, a strong link has been found between
rainfall in the Congo Basin and circulation
patterns over the North Atlantic during the
northern hemisphere’s winter and spring (ie
deep convection which drives atmospheric
circulation that affect rainfall).433 The Congo
Basin represents the third largest region of
deep convection on earth, after the Western
Pacific and Amazonia. However, there is less
known about climate processes in the Congo
than in the other regions.434 Therefore, it is
quite possible that deforestation in the DRC
could affect rainfall, not only locally, but also
on the other side of the globe in ways that are
not yet understood or predictable.

As already discussed, there is a fundamental
conflict of interest between the industrial
logging model of development supported by
the World Bank and the preservation of intact
forest areas. While the World Bank
acknowledges that forests store half of the
earth’s terrestrial carbon stock, and that forest
management in Africa and elsewhere has an
important part to play in mitigating climate
change,435 it has no formal requirement to
take climate factors into account in its
development projects.436

The DRC is currently number 21 on the global
list of CO2-emitting countries, almost
exclusively as a result of land use change and
timber extraction. The country produces more
greenhouse gas emissions than Belgium,
Finland, Greece, Ireland, Spain, Switzerland or
The Netherlands.437

Roads are a fundamental indicator in predicting
where deforestation will occur in the future.
Given that logging companies open up new
logging trails and roads, increasing access to
the forest, the location of logging concessions
are of a prime importance for deforestation
modelling.438

One such study which predicted future forest
loss in Central Africa suggests that the DRC
risks losing more than 40% of its forest, with
the area north of the Congo river and around
infrastructure such as roads and the river
transport network being entirely cleared by

‘Curbing deforestation is a

highly cost-effective way of

reducing greenhouse gas

emissions and has the

potential to offer significant
reductions fairly quickly.’443

Stern Review, 2006

70

CARVING UP THE CONGO

2050. It is estimated that this will release a
total of between 31.1 and 34.4 billion tonnes
440 roughly equivalent to the UK’s CO2
of CO2
emissions over the last sixty years.441

Given the pivotal role of the forest in terms of
climate change, it is deeply worrying that to
date no concrete steps have been taken to stop
degradation of the DRC’s forests through
logging and so help prevent this climate impact.
While there are provisions in the Forestry
Code442 allowing for forests to be set aside to
generate state revenue from the environmental
services they provide, in the absence of
international political will to drive forward
comprehensive land use planning, these
provisions have not yet been acted upon.

Furthermore, to date natural forests (as distinct
from carbon sequestration from new
plantations) have not been taken into account
by existing market mechanisms that reward
storage of forest carbon for its contribution to

limiting climate change. For the moment, the
globally significant carbon storage service
provided by the DRC’s rainforests does not
bring the country any economic return, and
although the international community, including
the World Bank, pays lip service to this global
good, its programmes do not actively promote
protection of the rainforest from deforestation
or degradation. There is thus an ominous gap
between the acknowledged importance of this
key environmental service to the global
community and the focus of economic
assistance to the DRC.

If the DRC is to realise a future of genuine
development to the benefit of its people and
the environment, global climate protection,
rather than the short-term presence of
rapacious extractive industries which leave
little but destruction in their wake, should
surely be the channel through which the
rainforest is mobilised to bring overseas
investment to the country.

CARVING UP THE CONGO

71

734,400

1,480
266,400

THE COST TO THE CLIMATE OF
LOGGING AND LOGGING ROADS
IN THE CONGO RAINFOREST

Between 1981 and 1998, 170,000 hectares of
lowland rainforest was logged in the Siforco’s
K7 forest holding in Equateur Province.444
The logged area has since been returned to
the DRC State.445

Within the returned area of K7, logging roads
are estimated to cover a total length of 740
kilometres with an average width of 50
metres, including verges. This correlates with
Siforco’s planned logging roads for its K8 forest
holding, which are between 50m and
60m wide.446

Studies from the Amazonia have shown that
fragmentation edge effects cause an average
of approximately 10% of the biomass lost447
in the outermost 100m of forest block – some
areas lost up to 36%.448 In addition, it has
been estimated for the Republic of the Congo,
adjacent to the DRC, that 0.46 tonnes of
carbon are emitted per cubic metre of timber
extracted.449

On the basis of these figures, Greenpeace has
sought to quantify the contribution to
atmospheric carbon of industrial logging in the
returned 170,000 hectare area of K7 during
the period specified above. In our calculations,
we have assumed that principal roads would
create fragmentation effects on a similar scale
to those in Amazonia affecting both sides of
the logging road; that incidental tree damage
would occur at the same rate as estimated for
the neighbouring Republic of the Congo; and
that, while both above- and below-ground
tree biomass would be lost as a result of
logging and subsequent decay, soil carbon
would not be affected.

We were unfortunately unable to incorporate a
detailed estimate of the total carbon impact
resulting from the company’s use of fuel in its
logging and processing operations, and in
transportation of timber to the port of export.
However, according to a study by the
Interafrican Forest Industries Association (IFIA)
a typical logging company with a sawmill and
kiln dryer uses about 500,000 litres of petrol
each month for logging and transport.450 This
would produce carbon emissions of nearly
3,800 tonnes per year.451

Counting the carbon cost of Siforco’s K7 forest holding

1. Logging infrastructure impact on carbon stock

Area cleared for logging roads and a log stockpile area
Average carbon densities of for lowland rainforest
SUBTOTAL Carbon impact of logging infrastructure

(hectares)452
(tonnes C/hectare)453
(tonnes C)

4080
180
4080 x 180 =

2. Forest fragmentation impact on carbon stock

Forest edge created by logging roads
Estimated biomass lost by fragmentation
Biomass loss
SUBTOTAL Carbon impact of forest fragmentation

3. Timber extraction impact on carbon stock

Volume of timber extracted
Carbon released by vegetation damaged and left to
decompose per m3 of commercial timber harvested
SUBTOTAL Carbon impact of timber extraction
K7 Returned 170,000 hectare area TOTAL contribution
to atmospheric carbon

(hectares)454
(%)455
(equivalent hectares)
(tonnes C)

14,800
10%
14,800 x 10% =
1480 x 180 =

(m3)456

900,000

(tonnes C) 457
(tonnes C)

(tonnes C)
(tonnes CO2)

0.46
0.46 x 900,000 = 414,000

1,414,800
5,183,827

Given that 50 million hectares of rainforests are allocated to industrial logging across Central Africa, this impact from an
area of just 170,000 hectares shows that logging fragmentation is a significant additional source of emissions to the
figures currently being reported under IPCC Land Use Change and Forestry category.

72

CARVING UP THE CONGO

Logging roads on 170,000 hectares
formerly part of Siforco’s K7 holding

The logging roads have been digitally enhanced

from Landsat Images

©Google

CARVING UP THE CONGO 73

30km

