# Case studies: The impacts of extracting and burning natural gas

![Local Woman with a Breathing Mask in Texas. © Les Stone /
Greenpeace](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2025/03/498d076e-gp0stoy56-1024x683.jpg)Lynn Buehring wears a
breathing mask outside her home in Karnes County. She lives with her husband
in the middle of three different hydrofracking wells that have been flaring
since 2011. She is suffering from severe reactions to the chemicals and
Hydrogen Sulfide (H2S) gas released from the wells. Her entire life has been
turned upside down. A retirement place on a quiet country road has now become
a nightmare. She has to wear a respirator whenever the winds blow in her
direction. She is suing Marathon Oil for relief. © Les Stone / Greenpeace

Numerous studies have showed that the processes of extracting and burning
natural gas, including fracking, have grave environmental impacts. Here are a
few of them.

## New studies find massive methane leakage from fracking

New studies from the Front Range area of Colorado, Utah, and Marcellus region
of Pennsylvania have found VOC and methane leakage from
[fracking](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/en/campaigns/global-warming-
and-energy/The-Problem/fracking/) wells that far exceed EPA’s predictions.
These studies measure methane levels from the air, which can capture emission
data from fracking plays that can have thousands of wells concentrated in one
area. Previous studies have used ground-based measurements of a handful of
wells, which can miss super-emitting sources in the gas fields.

### Colorado

Scientists have found that an area of Colorado that has seen a huge boom in
oil and gas drilling has been emitting three times more methane than
previously believed — 19.3 tons an hour. The area is called the Front Range,
and is [home to one of the biggest fracking booms in the
US](http://www.cleanwateraction.org/feature/fracking-front-range).

The scientists also measured industry emissions of cancer-causing benzene and
smog-forming volatile organic compounds at levels up to seven times higher
than government agencies have estimated. [Their
study](http://cires.colorado.edu/news/press/2014/airbornemeasurements.html) —
done at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s Cooperative
Institute for Research in Environmental Sciences and partly supported by the
Environmental Defense Fund — is based on data gathered in 2012 from [aircraft
flying over the drilling zones north of
Denver](http://www.denverpost.com/environment/ci_25719742/scientists-flying-
over-colorado-oil-boom-find-worse). These emissions have been shown to be
dangerous to people near gas development, causing [health problems in adults
and linked to birth
defects](http://www.ucdenver.edu/about/newsroom/newsreleases/Pages/health-
impacts-of-fracking-emissions.aspx).

Acknowledging the serious problem posed by air pollution from fracking,
Colorado’s Governor John Hickenlooper proposed a set of new air regulations on
fracking, the first in the nation. Various shale industry companies approved
the regulations, which signals that the industry is aware that air emissions
from fracking are dangerous and undeniable. Because of the fracking boom, [the
ozone levels in the Front Range of Colorado are worse than those in Los
Angeles](http://greenpeaceblogs.org/2013/11/19/colorado-fracking-companies-
admit-to-major-air-pollution-problem-emissions-rules-proposed/).

### Pennsylvania

A study published in March of 2014 in the [Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences](http://www.pnas.org/content/early/2014/04/10/1316546111) found
that drilling operations in Pennsylvania emitted 100 to 1,000 times more
methane than the Environmental Protection Agency previously estimated. The
study took air measurements from 7 well pads, and observed a leakage of 34
grams of methane per second, on average, much higher than the EPA-estimated
0.04 grams to 0.30 grams of methane per second.

The study, conducted by Cornell University, found [methane
emission](http://ecowatch.com/2014/04/15/purdue-cornell-researchers-methane-
emissions/) rates from the drilling process were up to 1000[ times EPA
estimates](http://www.pnas.org/content/early/2014/04/10/1316546111.abstract).

### Utah

A team of researchers from NOAA in Utah’s Uintah basin determined that methane
emissions from the oil and natural gas fields in totaled about 55,000 kg (more
than 120,000 lbs) an hour. That emission rate is about 6 to 12 percent of the
average hourly natural gas production in Uintah County during the month of
February. Overall they [found a leakage rate of 60 tons per hour for the day
they measured](http://cires.colorado.edu/news/press/2013/methaneleaks.html).

A recent industry funded
[study](http://www.utexas.edu/news/2013/09/16/understanding-methane-
emissions/) out of the University of Texas estimated that methane’s leak rate,
nationally, is around 1.5 percent of production, but studies [like the one
done over the Uintah basin call those estimations into
question](http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/ghgemissions/usinventoryreport.html).

## Methane emissions from end use

The infrastructure required to transport and use gas has become a major
concern as new studies have found huge methane leakage rates. For example, new
methane surveys in major cities have found dangerously, sometimes explosively
high levels of methane leaking from aging city infrastructure. A recent
[deadly explosion](http://www.cnn.com/2014/03/15/us/aging-gas-infrastructure/)
in New York City was due to exactly these kinds of methane leaks.

## Pipeline leakage

Beyond the methane leaks from drilling and venting associated with existing
and abandoned wells, more methane is lost every day in processing, handling
and transporting gas to its ultimate point of consumption. Pipeline losses
occur in a more than 2-million-mile system that stretches from the production
fields to residential customers. This gas transportation system has three main
parts:

  1. Gathering lines in production fields which are largely unregulated, and in many systems, unknown and unmapped (about 240,000 miles estimated);
  2. Natural gas transmission pipelines to processing and storage locations (278,269 miles); and
  3. Distribution lines to residential and business customers (about 1.8 million miles).

Leakage of methane from pipelines – a problem throughout the world – has been
reported and studied for years. New Scientist noted in September 1990, that
natural gas pipeline mains in Great Britain leaked so much methane that the
leaks there contributed more to global warming than did the burned gas. As of
2006 the U.S. natural gas industry operated over 38,000 miles of natural gas
pipelines that were made of cast iron, the most leak-prone type of gas piping.
In 2012, a U.S. GAO study on thousands of miles of “gathering lines” that
collect oil and gas from production sites revealed that these lines are not
regulated by the federal government, meaning they are not regularly inspected
for leaks or corrosion.

An incident report of January 2013 filed for a Questar Company natural gas
pipeline operating in rural Duchesne County, Utah near the town of Roosevelt,
indicated that a relief valve on the line was opened and vented gas for
approximately 3 hours and 55 minutes, resulting in a “DOT reportable incident”
of some 3 million standard cubic feet or more of unintentionally released gas.
This report also indicated that the release occurred in “a very rural area,”
and that there were “no off-site impacts reported.” These are the kinds of
methane releases that are likely occurring throughout the oil and gas patch
nationwide.

## Urban distribution pipelines: Markey report

There is a widespread national problem with gas leaks and pipeline failures in
urban gas distribution systems. According to a report released by U.S. Senator
Edward Markey (D-MA), gas distribution companies in 2011 reported releasing 69
billion cubic feet of natural gas to the atmosphere, almost enough to meet the
state of Maine’s gas needs for a year and equal to the annual carbon dioxide
emissions of about six million automobiles. Gas companies, however, are slow
to replace bad pipe. In 2012 gas companies replaced just 3 percent of their
distribution mains made of cast iron or bare steel. Leaky gas pipes nationwide
presently span about 91,000 miles across 46 states. Nationally, consumers paid
at least $20 billion from 2000-2011 for gas that was unaccounted for and never
used. Observes the Markey report:

Natural gas has been touted as a cleaner alternative to coal for producing
electricity, but its environmental benefits cannot be fully realized so long
as distribution pipelines are leaking such enormous quantities of gas, which
is primarily comprised of methane, a greenhouse gas that is at least 21 times
more potent than CO-2. Americans also remain at risk from gas explosions and
other safety hazards caused by leaky natural gas pipelines. From 2002 to 2012,
almost 800 significant incidents on gas distribution pipelines, including
several hundred explosions, killed 116 people, injured 465 others, and caused
more than $800 million in property damage.

In 2013, researchers conducted a 1500-mile street-by-street survey in
Washington, DC, finding nearly 6,000 leaks from the city’s aging pipe system,
including 12 locations where methane had collected to [explosive
levels](http://www.climatecentral.org/news/d.c.-methane-leaks-threaten-
explosions-climate-16964) (50,000 to 500,000 ppm). A similar report conducted
in Boston found almost [3,400 pipeline leaks across 785
miles](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0269749112004800).
The Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration (PHMSA), a
regulatory agency within the Department of Transportation, is responsible for
tracking pipeline safety and emissions. According to analysis of 2011 industry
data reported to PHMSA, the average lost and unaccounted for percentage of gas
among 174 companies with natural gas distribution systems of 1000 pipeline
miles or more was 1.6%.

Together with studies of gas production fields that have found methane
emissions many times greater than estimated, these studies paint a picture of
a gas infrastructure that contributes significant amounts of greenhouse gas to
the atmosphere.

## Purposeful emissions: Venting and flaring

In addition to accidental, or fugitive emissions, there are a significant
amount of purposeful emissions from oil and gas production in the form of
venting and flaring.

Venting involves releasing gas directly into the atmosphere during normal
operational extraction and handling. In the past, methane gas was considered a
waste product of oil drilling, and was vented directly into the atmosphere in
huge quantities. Between 1973 and 1989, an annual average of more than 130
billion cubic feet of natural gas was flared or vented during production. In
addition, thousands of oil storage tanks also emit plumes of methane and other
gases. In 2008, according to EPA’s estimates, the amount of natural gas vented
and flared on onshore federal oil and gas leases totaled around 126 billion
cubic feet (Bcf) of gas.

In some of today’s oil fields, like the Bakken in North Dakota, gas is still
an unwanted byproduct that is vented rather than stored. This usually occurs
in oil extraction areas that are not adjacent to gas pipelines.

Gas is also commonly flared or burned off. Flaring emits CO2 as a combustion
by-product, while venting releases methane and other chemicals. In wells where
oil and gas are co-produced, the “associated gas” is usually vented or flared
off continuously. This flaring does not burn 100% of the gas, leading to VOC
and methane pollution. In fact scientists are not sure how much residual
methane and air contaminants escape from flares unburned.

In September 2011, the New York Times reported that every day, more than 100
million cubic feet of natural gas was being flared in the Bakken shale region.
That flared gas also accounts for at least two million tons of carbon dioxide
released into the atmosphere every year, roughly equivalent to the emissions
of a medium-size coal-fired power plant. According to the U.S. Energy
Information Administration (EIA), as of 2011 more than 35 per cent of North
Dakota’s natural gas production was burnt off in flares. In addition, there is
very little oversight of venting and flaring in many U.S. production regions,
and current industry reporting is not always reliable.

Other hydrocarbons and compounds that are present in vented and flared gas –
such as volatile organic compounds – can harm air quality by increasing
ground-level ozone levels and contributing to regional haze. For example, VOC
pollution from the oil and gas industry has been a growing concern in
Colorado, where Governor John Hickelooper and the oil and gas industry were
forced to propose new regulations, because of high levels of air pollution
from fracking. Ozone pollution from fracking in Colorado has become so bad
that the air quality of the sparsely populate Front Range was as bad as Los
Angeles.

Oilfield accidents, broken valves and gauges, and sudden pressure surges can
also result in irregular releases.

## Black Carbon

One associated greenhouse problem with flares is that they are also a global
source of something called “black carbon”– a kind of particulate matter that
also figures into the global warming calculus, though their role is not
precisely understood. The action of black carbon is, like methane, a “short
lived climate forcer.” Some scientists believe black carbon’s total effect in
the atmosphere is likely to be second only to CO2. In 2011, the Arctic Council
noted that gas flaring is a source of black carbon that “requires special
attention,” and in March 2012, EPA reported to Congress that black carbon
emissions from flaring were of “particular concern.” Comprehensive estimates
of black carbon emissions from the natural gas industry do not exist.

## LNG exports

With the boom in U.S. shale gas production as one of the key drivers, the U.S.
is gearing up to become a major exporter of natural gas. Many see the U.S.,
with its projected plentiful supplies of gas and a pipeline network that can
move the gas to seaside locations for export, as well positioned to capitalize
on the boom. Natural gas can be liquefied and compressed to liquified natural
gas (LNG) for long distance transport to overseas markets by way of specially-
equipped tankers. At the export sites, the gas must first be liquefied at
specialized facilities, then shipped in tankers that store the gas at 260
degrees below zero. A number of companies are now seeking approval to export
LNG from about 24 locations in the U.S. According to the Congressional
Research Service, there have been 31 applications for U.S. LNG export permits.
This potential export capacity represents nearly 50 percent of current U.S.
production. Eight of the projects involve construction of liquefaction
facilities at costs ranging from $6 billion to $10 billion each. New LNG
export terminals would cost in the range of $20 billion each. As of September
2013, most of the projects have already received approval. Four others, with
some limitation – Sabine Pass, Freeport, Lake Charles, and Dominion Cove Point
– have received DOE approval to export to non-free-trade countries.

Industry analysts forecast that demand for LNG will more than double from
about 240 million tons in 2012 to 550 million tons annually by 2030. Major oil
and gas companies, including Chevron, Exxon Mobil, Royal Dutch Shell and
Total, are planning up to $400 billion in LNG investments around the world.
ExxonMobil, for one, has been among American companies pushing DOE to speed up
its approval of applications to export natural gas. ExxonMobil is also seeking
a Canadian LNG export license for British Columbia. The American Petroleum
Institute (API) has also urged DOE to speed up the pace of approving LNG
export facilities. “There is a global race to build this infrastructure and
secure a competitive position in the international market,” Erik Milito,
director of the upstream sector for API, said in an October 2013 statement.

### Cove Point, Maryland

In September 2013, the Department of Energy approved permits for a fourth LNG
export facility at Cove Point, Maryland. Situated on Chesapeake Bay, the Cove
Point facility was initially opened in 1978 as an LNG import site. Dominion
Energy wants to reengineer the plant to converted gas into LNG for export.
Opponents of the plant have raised concerns about related pipeline
construction, increased demand for gas extracted by fracking in the region. A
number of other U.S. LNG terminals – originally built to receive LNG imports –
are also in the queue for permits to be modified for exporting LNG.

In the wake of the crisis in Ukraine, members of both parties and the Obama
Administration supported expediting the approval of LNG export facilities as a
national security priority. On March 24, 2014, the Department of Energy gave
preliminary approval to the seventh LNG export facility – the first on the
west coast – the Jordan Cove terminal in Coos Bay, Oregon.

Among those on Capitol Hill supporting gas exports and calling on the Obama
administration for faster approval of pending applications is Senator Lisa
Murkowski, the top Republican on the Senate energy committee, who has stated,
“the United States has a narrowing window of opportunity to join the global
gas trade.” Other lead proponents include Senate Energy and Natural Resources
Committee chair Mary Landrieu (D-LA) and Senator Mark Udall (D-CO), who
introduced a bill (S. 2083) that would fast track LNG exports by automatically
deeming LNG exports to WTO member countries in the public interest.

## “Emissions-intensive.”

Rising methane emissions are also part of the LNG export equation, since the
use of liquefied natural gas adds three additional stages to the natural gas
life-cycle – liquefaction (where gas is cooled and pressurized), offloading
and regasification (where LNG tankers offload their cargo) and transmission.
In May 2013, offering congressional testimony, James Bradbury of the World
Resources Institute explained: “The process of liquefaction, transport, and
regasification of LNG is highly emissions-intensive, increasing by 15 percent
the total life cycle GHG emissions associated with exported U.S. natural gas,
compared to natural gas that is produced and consumed domestically. These
added upstream emissions also significantly reduce the relative advantage that
natural gas would have over higher-emitting fuels, like coal and oil.” In
2014, the Environmental Integrity Project estimated that of the 21 new LNG
export terminals projected for development by the Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission, 9 have obtained or applied for Clean Air Act permits that add up
to 29 million tons of greenhouse gas emission per year – more than 3 large
coal plants combined.

DOE Report finds LNG worse than coal

A recent [DOE study of
LNG](http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/wonkblog/wp/2014/06/09/exporting-u-s-
natural-gas-isnt-as-clean-as-you-think/) exports facilities found that
liquification and shipment of methane would be detrimental to the climate. The
report found that benefits of cleaner, more efficient combustion of natural
gas are largely offset by methane leakage in U.S. production and pipelines and
by methane leaks and energy used in the process of liquefying and transporting
the LNG. In the case of shipping LNG from the U.S. gulf coast to Shanghai, the
greenhouse gas benefits could in some cases be completely offset by those
factors when measured over a 20-year period, the report says.

U.S. exports of LNG to China could end up being worse from a greenhouse gas
perspective than if China simply built a new power plant and burned its own
coal supplies.

* * *

### Sources

  * Working Group I, “Contribution to the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report, Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis,” Final Draft Underlying Scientific, Technical Assessment, September 26. 2013. [www.climatechange2013.org](http://www.climatechange2013.org/images/uploads/WGIAR5_WGI-12Doc2b_FinalDraft_All.pdf)
  * Shindell et al. estimate 20-year GWP for methane, including aerosol responses, to be 86 to 105. Drew T. Shindell et al., “Improved Attribution of Climate Forcing to Emissions,” Science, 30 October 2009, Vol. 326, pp 716-718.
  * U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO), Pipeline Safety: Collecting Data and Sharing Information on Federally Unregulated Gathering Pipelines Could Help Enhance Safety, March 22, 2012, GAO #12-388, 41pp. [www.gao.gov](http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-12-388)
  * “Questar Natural Gas Leaked 4 Hours – 3 Million Cu Ft Lost to Global Warming – ‘Just a Rural Area’,”Arlington TX Barnett Shale Blogger, January 15, 2013. [http://barnettshalehell.wordpress.com](http://barnettshalehell.wordpress.com/2013/01/15/questar-natural-gas-leaked-4-hours-3-million-cu-ft-lost-to-global-warming-just-a-rural-area/)
  * “America Pays for Gas Leaks: Natural Gas Pipeline Leaks Cost Consumers Billions,” A Report Prepared for U. S. Senator Edward J. Markey (D-MA), U.S. Senate, August 1, 2013. [http://www.markey.senate.gov](http://www.markey.senate.gov/documents/markey_lost_gas_report.pdf)
  * “America Pays for Gas Leaks: Natural Gas Pipeline Leaks Cost Consumers Billions,” A Report Prepared for U. S. Senator Edward J. Markey (D-MA), U.S. Senate, August 1, 2013.
  * [http://www.markey.senate.gov](http://www.markey.senate.gov/documents/markey_lost_gas_report.pdf); Note that data regarding distribution pipes does not include data for gas transmissions or gathering. See “Significant Pipeline Incidents” data, PHMSA. Available at: [http://primis.phmsa.dot.gov](http://primis.phmsa.dot.gov/comm/reports/safety/SigPSI.html?nocache=9717)
  * Robert B. Jackson et al., “Natural Gas Pipeline Leaks Across Washington, DC,” Environmental Science & Technology, January 16, 2014. Available at [http://pubs.acs.org](http://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/es404474x).
  * N.G. Phillips, et al., “Mapping urban pipeline leaks: Methane leaks across Boston,” Environ. Pollut. 2013, 173, 1-4. See [http://www.phmsa.dot.gov](http://www.phmsa.dot.gov/pipeline/library/data-stats) for more information.
  * Jack Doyle, Crude Awakening: The Oil Mess in America, Friends of the Earth, Washington, D.C. , 1994, p. 201.
  * U.S. General Accountability Office (GAO), Federal Oil And Gas Leases: Opportunities Exist to Capture Vented and Flared Natural Gas, Which Would Increase Royalty Payments and Reduce Greenhouse Gases, Report No. GAO-11-34, November 29, 2010. [www.gao.gov](http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-11-34)
  * Clifford Krauss, “In North Dakota, Flames of Wasted Natural Gas Light the Prairie,”New York Times, September 26, 2011. [www.nytimes.com](http://www.nytimes.com/2011/09/27/business/energy-environment/in-north-dakota-wasted-natural-gas-flickers-against-the-sky.html)
  * Julia Sklar, “Gas Flares from Bakken Fracking Are Visible from Space,” New Scientist, January 28, 2013. [www.newscientist.com](http://www.newscientist.com/blogs/shortsharpscience/2013/01/julia-sklar-reporter.html)
  * US EPA (2012).Report to Congress on Black Carbon.EPA-450/R-12-001, Research Triangle Park, NC, United States Environmental Protection Agency.
  * Arctic Council (2011). Arctic Council Task Force on Short-Lived Climate Forcers Progress Report and Recommendations for Ministers, Nuuk Greenland. Arctic Council Task Force on Short-Lived Climate Forcers. [arctic-council.npolar.no](http://arctic-council.npolar.no/accms/export/sites/default/en/meetings/2011-nuuk-ministerial/docs/3-0a_TF_SPM_recommendations_2May11_final.pdf)
  * M. Z. Jacobson, “Short-term Effects of Controlling Fossil-fuel Soot, Biofuel Soot and Gases, and Methane on Climate, Arctic Ice, and Air Pollution Health,”.J. Geophys. Res. 115, 2010.
  * See [http://www.ferc.gov](http://www.ferc.gov/industries/gas/indus-act/lng/lng-proposed-potential-export.pdf).
  * Michael Ratner, Paul W. Parfomak, Ian F. Fergusson, and Linda Luther, “U.S. Natural Gas Exports: New Opportunities, Uncertain Outcomes,” Congresional Research Service, Washington, DC, September 17, 2013. [www.fas.org](http://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/R42074.pdf)
  * Peter Galuszka, “U.S. Gears Up to Be a Prime Gas Exporter,” New York Times, September 30, 2013.
  * U.S. Department of Energy, “Energy Department Authorizes Dominion’s Proposed Cove Point Facility to Export Liquefied Natural Gas,”Energy.gov, September 11, 2013
  * energy.gov
  * Chesapeake Climate Action Network, [http://www.chesapeakeclimate.org/](http://www.chesapeakeclimate.org/index.php?option=com_k2&view=item&id=3726:stop-fracked-gas-exports-at-cove-point&Itemid=18)
  * U.S. Senate Committee on Energy & Natural Resources, “Murkowski Comments on DOE Approval of Dominion Cove Point LNG Export License,” Senate.gov, September 11 2013. www.energy.senate.gov
  * Testimony of James Bradbury, Senior Associate, Climate and Energy Program, World Resources Institute, Before the U.S. House of Representatives Energy and Commerce Subcommittee on Energy and Power, Public Hearing: “U.S. Energy Abundance: Exports and the Changing Global Energy Landscape,” May 7, 2013. [www.wri.org](http://www.wri.org/)
  * Environmental Integrity Project, “Gas Rush: Increasing Greenhouse Emissions from New Oil, Gas, and Chemical Plants,” December 5, 2013. Available at: [www.environmentalintegrity.org](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/fighting-climate-chaos/issues/natural-gas/case-studies/www.environmentalintegrity.org)

