702 H St NW
Washington, DC 20001
1.800.326.0959
www.greenpeaceusa.org
www.DontBuyExxonMobil.org

Don’t Buy
Stop Global Warming

Some Corporations Are Cooking
the Books. ExxonMobil Is
Cooking The Planet.

ExxonMobil, one of the largest corporations on the planet,
has spent the last decade working to sabotage action on
global  warming.  ExxonMobil  has  spent  more  than  any
other oil company to derail U.S. policy on global warming
and ensure our dependence on fossil fuels.

Scientists say that if global warming, caused by burning
oil,  coal  and  gas,  continues  unabated,  there  will  be  a
massive  increase  in  temperatures,  storms,  floods,
droughts and diseases. But ExxonMobil still denies that
burning fossil fuels causes global warming.

While  other  energy  companies  have  been  investing  in
clean, renewable energy sources, ExxonMobil continues
to spend on oil exploration and development while ignor-
ing the ramifications of these destructive efforts and its
own  responsibility  in  solving  the  planet’s  largest
environmental crisis.

Greenpeace  has  launched  an  unprecedented  global
campaign to stop ExxonMobil from continuing to corrupt
U.S. energy policy and the environment.

Global Warming

Human activity is changing the climate that makes life on
Earth possible. The world is becoming warmer due to the
build up of gases generated by human activities. One of

e
c
a
e
p
n
e
e
r
G

/
r
e
s
s
V

i

t
r
e
b
o
R
©

the main gases causing global warming is carbon dioxide,
which comes from the burning of fossil fuels—particularly
oil, coal and gas. Global warming not only increases the
Earth’s  temperature,  it  also  leads  to  an  increase  in
floods,  droughts  and  wildfires,  intensified  hurricanes,
heat  waves,  the  spread  of  infectious  disease  and
species extinction.

A panel of scientists called the Intergovernmental Panel
on  Climate  Change  (IPCC)  is  recognized  as  the  most
credible  scientific  authority  on  global  warming.  The
IPCC’s  latest  report  on  climate  science  (released  in
2001)  found  “new  and  stronger  evidence  that  most  of
the observed warming over the last 50 years is attributable

to  human  activities.”  It  found  that  global  warming  is
already having a negative impact on the environment.

change  its  position  or  be  stopped  from  influencing
government policy.

A small minority of scientists, known as “skeptics,” chal-
lenge climate science. Many of them have been funded by
fossil  fuel  companies,  including  ExxonMobil.  These  are
scientists who state that global warming is not occurring,
is  not  due  to  human  causes  and  that  warmer  tempera-
tures will even be beneficial due to shorter winters. It is
important to note that while these skeptics are often rec-
ognized  scientists,  their  views  on  global  warming  have
been  discredited  by  the  rest  of  the  scientific  community.
The  majority  of  scientists  are  not  debating  whether
humans are causing global warming, but about the pace
and impacts on different parts of the world.

Kyoto Protocol - the global warming treaty

ExxonMobil has spent hundreds of millions of dollars over
more than a decade to undermine meaningful efforts to
solve global warming. While heavily lobbying the U.S. gov-
ernment to derail global warming action, the company has
also funded economic “scare” reports on global warming
policy  and  launched  a  multi-million  dollar  advertising
campaign against ratification of the global warming treaty,
the  Kyoto  Protocol.  ExxonMobil’s  efforts  were  finally
rewarded  when  President  Bush  announced  that  the
the
United  States  would  be  withdrawing
Kyoto Protocol.

from

The Kyoto Protocol is an international agreement among
industrialized nations to reduce emissions of carbon diox-
ide and other greenhouse gases that cause global warm-
ing.  These  reductions  are  legally  binding  once  countries
agree to ratify the treaty. The Kyoto Protocol is a crucial
and significant first step towards tackling global warming.

In March 2001, President Bush announced that the U.S.
would  not  ratify  the  Kyoto  treaty,  declaring  it  dead.
Fortunately, the rest of the world refused to let President
Bush wreck ten years of negotiations on global warming
and  continued  to  move  forward  to  implement  the  Kyoto
Protocol—soon to become international law.

However,  as  the  United  States  is  the  largest  emitter  of
global warming pollution, we cannot hope to stop global
warming unless the U.S. starts taking action to reduce its
global  warming  pollution.  That  cannot  happen  until
ExxonMobil is held accountable for its blatant interference
with global warming policy. ExxonMobil must be forced to

Dirty Money

ExxonMobil’s contributions to the Republican Party in the
2000  election  cycle  totaled  more  than  $1  million,  more
than any other oil company. In 1999 ExxonMobil’s lobby-
ing  budget,  $11.7  million,  was  the  fifth  highest  in  the
and
U.S.,
tobacco giants.

pharmaceutical

outspent

only

by

As  a  result  of  these  efforts,  ExxonMobil  has  enjoyed  a
leading  role  in  shaping  White  House  energy  policies.  The
influence of the ExxonMobil agenda is demonstrated by the
following:

• a  major  role  in  the  pro-drilling  Bush/Cheney  energy
plan, which would only serve to increase the profits of
ExxonMobil  and  dramatically  increase  emissions  of
global warming pollution.

• a request to the Bush administration for the removal of
the head of the UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change,  which  has  concluded  that  human  activity  is
causing global warming.

As  an  international  organization,  Greenpeace  is  working
on a global-scale to Stop ExxonMobil. Our efforts to stop
ExxonMobil and stop global warming are the culmination
of  thousands  of  voices  concerned  about  the  future  of
our planet.

Call to action:

1. Don’t buy from ExxonMobil.

2. Sign up for monthly campaign updates and action

alerts at www.DontBuyExxonMobil.org

3. Download an activist kit from our website

www.DontBuyExxonMobil.org

4. E-mail or write CEO Lee Raymond from our website

www.DontBuyExxonMobil.org

Greenpeace is part of an alliance of social change
groups working to influence ExxonMobil’s behavior
in the human rights, environment, governance and
community relations areas. Visit
www.DontBuyExxonMobil.org for more information.

