# Financial Institutions Need to Support a Code Change to Cleanup Bitcoin

Big financial services companies like Fidelity need to acknowledge Bitcoin’s
climate pollution and other environmental impacts by taking responsibility for
the problem. The financial industry is generating revenue and creating
services to help grow this energy-intensive cryptocurrency. At the same time,
corporate pledges to reduce carbon emissions and sustainability plans don’t
include Bitcoin’s climate impacts or risks.

![The Skull of Satoshi Makes a New York
Debut](https://storage.googleapis.com/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/686b7e2c-gp0stvtof_web_size.jpg)Art and activism merge in
the striking art installation called the Skull of Satoshi, created by art
activist Benjamin Von Wong and Greenpeace USA to highlight Bitcoin’s record of
climate destruction.

# Introduction

_“Humanity is on thin ice — and that ice is melting fast…Our world needs
climate action on all fronts — everything, everywhere, all at once.”_

  * _United Nations Secretary-General Antonio Guterres March 2023_ _1_

The impacts of our climate crisis are growing every day. The fossil fuel
industry continues to threaten lives and livelihoods, from families in Florida
struggling to rebuild after Hurricane Ian to farmers in Central America
displaced by drought to children living near coal-fired power plants suffering
from asthma.2 Our society needs rapid decarbonization to avert accelerating
climate change damage. According to the International Energy Association,
achieving net-zero emissions by 2050 is necessary for limiting global
temperature rise to 1.5 C, which requires no more investments in fossil fuel
supplies and rapid growth of renewable energy.3

Perhaps surprisingly, Bitcoin has become a substantial and growing barrier to
slashing carbon emissions and phasing out fossil fuels. Bitcoin’s consensus
mechanism or validating transactions on its digital ledger or blockchain
consumes massive amounts of electricity from fossil fuels. Globally, its
**largest single source of electricity is coal-fired power plants.** 4 The
digital “mining” involved in maintaining Bitcoin is now emitting more
greenhouse gas emissions than many small and mid-sized countries.5

The financial industry is critical to all aspects of Bitcoin – from financing
large digital “mining” companies, facilitating conversions to and from fiat
currencies, and making the technology more accessible and widely adopted.6
Financial companies in various sectors are boosting their crypto and Bitcoin
business, despite pledges to reduce climate emissions and increase corporate
sustainability. **Banks, asset managers, and payment processing companies need
to take responsibility for the climate and community impacts of Bitcoin and
support a code change to solve these growing problems at a global scale.**

# Bitcoin’s Dirty Energy Problem

The source of Bitcoin’s climate problem comes from its code. Here is how it
works. Bitcoin is a digital cryptocurrency that operates outside of a central
bank or government by using a decentralized and collectively-maintained
database, or digital ledger, a record of all Bitcoin transactions stored on
the blockchain. The records’ accuracy is protected through cryptography to
prevent double counting and fraudulent transactions. This process requires a
mechanism for validating transactions. Bitcoin does this through “Proof of
Work” – meaning users must show they are committed to protecting the system’s
integrity by putting in work, and thereby consuming electricity.7

The “work” is like a massive guessing game in which specialized computers,
called ASICs (Application Specific Integrated Circuits), race against one
another to guess the right answer to an algorithm. The computers act like
random number generators, and those with more computing power can guess more
numbers in less time, increasing their chances of picking the correct number.
The winner gets to validate a new set, or “block,” of Bitcoin transactions
added to the blockchain, and is rewarded with newly “mined” Bitcoin and fees.8

Speed demands large amounts of energy to power warehouses full of computers.
Bitcoin mining is estimated to use more electricity than some entire
countries, including what the Philippines and the Netherlands consumed in
2020.9 In the U.S., the seven largest crypto mining companies use the same
amount of electricity needed to power every residence in Houston, with a
population of 2.3 million people.10

> _Bitcoin mining is estimated to use more electricity than Netherlands_

The amount of electricity will only increase; as more miners join the
competition and computers become faster, Bitcoin’s system automatically
adjusts making it more difficult to guess the right number, thus requiring
even more computing power and electricity.11 In 2014 the electricity to mine a
single Bitcoin was equal to what an average U.S. household used in 275 days
but by 2022 that skyrocketed to around nine years.12

The cheaper the energy source, the more profit for the miners. Thus, miners
have an incentive to seek cheap energy, which often means polluting fossil
fuels like coal power. Researchers at Cambridge University estimate that 62%
of the electricity used for Bitcoin mining globally in 2022 came from fossil
fuels, with the most from coal and only 26% from renewables.13 Bitcoin mining
companies have even reopened mothballed coal-fired power plants in the U.S.14
The world needs to speed up the transition away from coal, not bring more coal
power online.15 **The dirty energy powering the Bitcoin mining industry in
2021 produced around 65.4 MtCO2 annually, comparable to country-level
emissions from Greece.****16** And Bitcoin’s carbon footprint has only grown
over time. Researchers estimate that in 2021, a single mined Bitcoin was
responsible for emitting 126 times the CO2 as a Bitcoin mined in 2016.17

The environmental damages from Bitcoin go beyond the GHG emissions.
Communities living near Bitcoin mining facilities face an array of negative
impacts from air, water, and noise pollution. Stronghold Digital Mining, a
company in which Fidelity Investments holds stocks, has purchased several
waste-coal-fired power plants in Pennsylvania.18 Waste coal is one of the
dirtiest forms of energy. Nearby residents are exposed to hazardous air
pollution including sulfur dioxide and nitrogen, and safety risks from large
trucks carrying waste coal on small country roads to the plant.19 Communities
across the U.S. living near Bitcoin mines have also complained about the
constant noise from the 24-hour operations.20 **One person living near a
mining facility in Limestone, Tennessee, described the noise as “like a jet
engine idling on a nearby tarmac.”****21** Water pollution can come from water
withdrawal and discharge for power plant operations and cooling mining
facilities, solid waste from burning fossil fuels, and land use changes from
the construction of these industrial operations.22

The thousands of specialized Bitcoin mining computers only last a short time,
and quickly become obsolete and turn into e-waste. Data is incomplete, but one
estimate suggests Bitcoin mining generates roughly 45.51 kt of e-waste in a
year, equivalent to the IT waste generated by the Netherlands.23

# Ties Between Big Finance and Polluting Bitcoin

While Bitcoin began as an alternative to traditional banking, it has become
increasingly interconnected with the mainstream financial sector, which is
helping grow Bitcoin and, in turn, its environmental damages. **Some of the
world’s largest banks, asset managers, and payment processing companies are
creating new crypto-related services and platforms, and funding Bitcoin mining
companies – all of which impact the climate crisis.**

Many different financial sectors are getting into cryptocurrency and providing
services, capital, and expertise vital to Bitcoin’s expansion. Asset managers
like Fidelity Investments control funds that own stock in Bitcoin mining
companies and offer investment products that let institutional and retail
customers bet on the price of Bitcoin.24 Banks, such as Goldman Sachs and JP
Morgan Chase, are creating new opportunities for clients to invest in Bitcoin
and the crypto sector, doing research and consulting on cryptocurrency, and
directly investing in Bitcoin miners.25 Banks also provide vital services for
cryptocurrency companies, like exchanges, to conduct daily operations, and
move Bitcoin back and forth between U.S. Dollars.26 Meanwhile payment
processing companies are making it easier to use Bitcoin for everyday
transactions and partnering with crypto exchange companies to offer debit and
credit cards that use Bitcoin.27

While these large financial services companies have made pledges to reduce
their carbon emissions, they continue to invest in carbon-intensive Bitcoin.
Many banks, asset managers, and payment processing companies have supported
the goals of the Paris Climate Agreement and made net-zero emissions pledges,
joining global initiatives like the United Nations Net-Zero Banking Alliance,
the United Nations Net-Zero Asset Owner Alliance, and the Glasgow Financial
Alliance for Net-Zero.28 Yet these **companies continue to invest in Bitcoin
and have largely failed to report their Bitcoin-related emissions.**

Companies know there is a problem. In 2017, Mastercard stated in its Corporate
Sustainability Report that “new research shows that cryptocurrencies like
Bitcoin are inherently more energy-intensive than Mastercard’s payment
network.”29 Yet Bitcoin’s decentralized nature seems to have distributed
responsibility for its impacts. Without traditional leadership, Bitcoin’s
future depends on its users and stakeholders to guide its future. To date
leaders in the financial industry have yet to acknowledge responsibility for
the problem or taken meaningful steps to push for a code change that would
clean up Bitcoin’s climate impacts. **As the climate crisis worsens and
Bitcoin’s appetite for electricity continues to grow, so will the pressure on
financial firms tied to Bitcoin to address its impacts.**

### _Fidelity Investments_

Our research finds that Fidelity Investments, the fourth largest asset manager
in the world, is making a big splash into Bitcoin and leading the way for the
financial industry.30 Fidelity was an early adopter of cryptocurrencies with a
foray into Bitcoin mining in 2014 under the leadership of the new CEO Abigail
Johnson, who is positioning the company to be a leader in cryptocurrency.31
Fidelity now offers many ways for institutional, private, and retail customers
to invest in Bitcoin, and is using its brand and reputation to instill a sense
of trust in volatile and polluting Bitcoin.

The company started a unit, Fidelity Digital Assets, in 2018 to focus on
crypto investments and services.32 The unit began by offering crypto trading
and custody – taking responsibility for securely storing investors’ digital
assets – for institutions. In March 2023, the company launched its own Bitcoin
trading and custody program for retail customers called “Fidelity Crypto.”33
This move marks the first time a major financial institution got involved in
directly trading cryptocurrencies and could compete with exchanges run by
crypto-focused companies like Coinbase.34

In a major move that could bring Bitcoin investing to millions of Americans,
the company announced in 2022 that employers with Fidelity 401(k) retirement
plans now have an option to let their employees direct a portion of savings
into Bitcoin.35 This decision sparked widespread concern from regulators and
policy-makers. The Department of Labor issued guidance suggesting 401(k) plans
avoid speculative and volatile crypto investments.36

Through Fidelity’s numerous investment funds, the company enables investing in
Bitcoin and holds stock in many Bitcoin-related companies. Fidelity is the
first major asset manager to create an exchange-traded fund (ETF) tied to the
current price of Bitcoin, the Fidelity Advantage Bitcoin ETF (FBTC). FBTC is
listed on the Toronto Stock Exchange, which lets clients indirectly invest in
Bitcoin.37 The Fidelity Crypto Industry and Digital Payments ETF (FDIG)
invests in crypto-related companies.38 Fidelity holds stock in publicly traded
Bitcoin mining companies, such as Marathon Digital Holdings, through these
crypto-specific and other general market funds.39

At the same time, Fidelity has sustainability goals and reports on
environmental and climate issues. Fidelity is a signatory to the United
Nations Principles for Responsible Investment and supports recommendations
from the Task Force on Climate-Related Financial Disclosures. Fidelity’s _2021
Environmental Report_ states that the company’s goal is, “to reduce our
greenhouse gas emissions by expanding use of renewable energy, with a
dedicated focus on reducing carbon.”40 The company’s _Environmental
Sustainability Statement of Intent_ claims it is beginning to adopt
sustainability throughout the business, including fund operations, products,
risk management, and procurement.41

# Recommendations

Big financial services companies like Fidelity need to acknowledge Bitcoin’s
climate pollution and other environmental impacts by taking responsibility for
the problem. The financial industry is generating revenue and creating
services to help grow this energy-intensive cryptocurrency. At the same time,
**corporate pledges to reduce carbon emissions and sustainability plans don’t
include Bitcoin’s climate impacts or risks.**

To help solve Bitcoin’s climate problem, these companies can use financial
clout and influence to incentivize a Bitcoin code change that virtually
eliminates its climate impacts and aligns Bitcoin with many other and newer
cryptocurrencies that use dramatically less electricity.42 Financial companies
can lead the way by convening experts, funders, and policymakers to create a
clean-future for Bitcoin. Now is the time to catalyze creativity and ingenuity
to design the next revolution in cryptocurrency.

> _Financial companies can use clout and influence to incentivize a Bitcoin
> code change that virtually eliminates its climate impacts_

Other cryptocurrencies have also changed, like Ethereum, the second largest
cryptocurrency in the world. It slashed its energy use by 99.95% by
transitioning from a Proof of Work consensus mechanism to a form of Proof of
Stake.43

**Bitcoin’s code has changed in the past and can be changed again to protect
our climate and communities.** 44 Its code is open and transparent; anyone
with the requisite skills can propose code modifications. The main challenge
is not technical, but social; large and small stakeholders within the Bitcoin
community can champion improvements and must reach consensus on making
changes.45

Bitcoin can thrive without energy-intensive, noisy, and polluting digital
mining. Bitcoin’s future growth may depend on it. The technology is still in
its early years, having debuted in 2009. With the right resources, incentives,
and support, new methods of securing its ledger and maintaining
decentralization can be developed and adopted. To achieve this change,
financial institutions connected to the system must work with other
stakeholders to change it for the better.

#

# References

  1. Borenstein, Seth and Frank Jordans. March 20, 2023. “World on ‘thin ice’ as UN climate report gives stark warning.” _Associated Press._<https://apnews.com/article/un-climate-change-report-ipcc-guterres-science-30d8451c0f3fb7b8a857e3ed4fd01172>.
  2. Bermeo, Sarah, David Leblang, and Gabriela Nagle Alverio. March 2022. “ Root Causes of Migration from Guatemala: Analysis of Subnational Trends.” _Duke Center for International Development._ <https://dcid.sanford.duke.edu/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2022/03/Migration-Policy-Brief-Guatemala-FINAL.pdf>; Komisarow, Sarah, and Emily L. Pakhtigian. May 2021. “The Effect of Coal-Fired Power Plant Closures on Emergency Department Visits for Asthma-Related Conditions Among 0- to 4-Year-Old Children in Chicago, 2009-2017.” _American Journal of Public Health_ 111, no. 5: 881–89.[ https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2021.306155](https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2021.306155).
  3. International Energy Agency. 2021. “Net Zero by 2050.” Paris. <https://www.iea.org/reports/net-zero-by-2050>.
  4. Neumueller, Alexander. September 27, 2022. “A deep dive into Bitcoin’s environmental impact.” _Cambridge Judge Business School._<https://www.jbs.cam.ac.uk/insight/2022/a-deep-dive-into-Bitcoins-environmental-impact/>.
  5. Cambridge Digital Assets Programme (CDAP) at the Cambridge Centre for Alternative Finance. “Greenhouse Gas Emissions Comparisons – Country Comparisons.” The Cambridge Bitcoin Electricity Consumption Index (CBECI). <https://ccaf.io/cbeci/ghg/comparisons>; Huang, Jon, Claire O’Neill, and Hiroko Tabuchi. September 3, 2021.“Bitcoin Uses More Electricity Than Many Countries. How Is That Possible?” _The New York Times_. <https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2021/09/03/climate/bitcoin-carbon-footprint-electricity.html>.
  6. Choe, Stan. October 19, 2021. “As Bitcoin goes mainstream, Wall Street looks to cash in.” _Associated Press_. <https://apnews.com/article/technology-business-bitcoin-f6d7ba724bf156fd5d603661c99fd5c2>.
  7. Whittaker, Matt and Farran Powell. July 22, 2022. “How Does Bitcoin Mining Work?” _Forbes._[https://www.forbes.com/advisor/investing/cryptocurrency/Bitcoin-mining/](https://www.forbes.com/advisor/investing/cryptocurrency/bitcoin-mining/); Huang, Jon, Claire O’Neill and Hiroko Tabuchi. September 3, 2021. “Bitcoin Uses More Electricity Than Many Countries. How Is That Possible?” _New York Times._ [https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2021/09/03/climate/Bitcoin-carbon-footprint-electricity.html](https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2021/09/03/climate/bitcoin-carbon-footprint-electricity.html).
  8. Huang, Jon, Claire O’Neill and Hiroko Tabuchi. September 3, 2021. “Bitcoin Uses More Electricity Than Many Countries. How Is That Possible?” _New York Times._ [https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2021/09/03/climate/Bitcoin-carbon-footprint-electricity.html](https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2021/09/03/climate/bitcoin-carbon-footprint-electricity.html).
  9. The Cambridge Centre for Alternative Finance (CCAF) estimates Bitcoin uses 122 TWh/yr of electricity. “Cambridge Bitcoin Electricity Consumption Index – Country Comparisons.” 2023. <https://ccaf.io/cbeci/index/comparisons>; Country data is drawn from U.S. Energy Information Administration Country data available at: <https://www.eia.gov/international/data/world/electricity/electricity-consumption>.
  10. Huang, Jon, Claire O’Neill and Hiroko Tabuchi. September 3, 2021. “Bitcoin Uses More Electricity Than Many Countries. How Is That Possible?” _New York Times._ [https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2021/09/03/climate/Bitcoin-carbon-footprint-electricity.html](https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2021/09/03/climate/bitcoin-carbon-footprint-electricity.html).
  11. _Ibid._
  12. _Ibid._ Data used in the analysis is from the U.S. Energy Information Administration and Blockchain.com.
  13. Cambridge Digital Assets Programme (CDAP) at the Cambridge Centre for Alternative Finance. 2023. “Bitcoin Electricity Consumption by Source (yearly).” The Cambridge Bitcoin Electricity Consumption Index (CBECI). <https://ccaf.io/cbeci/ghg/index>.
  14. Roeck, Martin and Thomas Drennen. 2022. “Life cycle assessment of behind-the-meter Bitcoin mining at US power plants.” _International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment_. 27, 355–365. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s11367-022-02025-0>;
  15. Gambhir, Ajay. February 2023.“Powering Past Coal Is Not Enough.” _Nature Climate Change_ 13, no. 2: 117–18. <https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-022-01574-4>.
  16. de Vries, Alex, Ulrich Gallersdörfer, Lena Klaaßen, and Christian Stoll. 2022. “Revisiting Bitcoin’s Carbon Footprint.” _Joule_ 6(3):498–502. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joule.2022.02.005>.
  17. Jones, Benjamin A., Andrew L. Goodkind, and Robert P. Berrens. September 29, 2022. “Economic Estimation of Bitcoin Mining’s Climate Damages Demonstrates Closer Resemblance to Digital Crude than Digital Gold.” _Scientific Reports_ 12, no. 1 14512. <https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-18686-8>.
  18. Based on data from March 2, 2023, Fidelity Extended Market Index Fund held 99,376 shares, Fidelity Series Total Market Index Fund held 25,776 shares, Fidelity Total Market Index Fund held 11,479 shares, and Fidelity NASDAQ Composite Index Fund 10,185 in Stronghold Digital Mining, accessed at Yahoo Finance (https://finance.yahoo.com/quote/SDIG/holders?p=SDIG); DeRoche, Mandy, Jeremy Fisher, Nick Thorpe, and Megan Wachspress. September 2022. “The Energy Bomb: How Proof-of-Work Cryptocurrency Mining Worsens the Climate Crisis and Harms Communities Now.” _Earthjustice_ and _The Sierra Club._[https://earthjustice.org/wp-content/uploads/energy_bomb_Bitcoin_white_paper_101322.pdf](https://earthjustice.org/wp-content/uploads/energy_bomb_bitcoin_white_paper_101322.pdf); Endres, Evan D. November 18, 2015. “Waste Coal: Time to finish what we started.” PennFuture. <https://www.pennfuture.org/Blog-Item-Waste-Coal-Time-to-finish-what-we-started>.
  19. DeRoche, Mandy, Jeremy Fisher, Nick Thorpe, and Megan Wachspress. September 2022. “The Energy Bomb: How Proof-of-Work Cryptocurrency Mining Worsens the Climate Crisis and Harms Communities Now.” _Earthjustice_ and _The Sierra Club._[https://earthjustice.org/wp-content/uploads/energy_bomb_Bitcoin_white_paper_101322.pdf](https://earthjustice.org/wp-content/uploads/energy_bomb_bitcoin_white_paper_101322.pdf).
  20. Monga, Vipal. November 12, 2021. “Bitcoin Mining Noise Drives Neighbors Nuts—a Giant Dentist Drill That Won’t Stop.” _Wall Street Journal_. [https://www.wsj.com/articles/Bitcoin-mining-noise-drives-neighbors-nuts-giant-dentist-drill-that-wont-stop-11636730904](https://www.wsj.com/articles/bitcoin-mining-noise-drives-neighbors-nuts-giant-dentist-drill-that-wont-stop-11636730904).
  21. Williams, Kevin. March 18, 2022. “An Appalachian town was told a Bitcoin mine would bring an economic boom. It got noise pollution and an eyesore? _Washington Post._[https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/2022/03/18/Bitcoin-mining-noise-pollution-appalachia/](https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/2022/03/18/bitcoin-mining-noise-pollution-appalachia/).
  22. White House Office of Science and Technology Policy. September 8, 2022. “Climate and Energy Implications of Crypto-Assets in the United States.” Washington, DC. <https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/09/09-2022-Crypto-Assets-and-Climate-Report.pdf>.
  23. Vries, Alex de, and Christian Stoll. December 1, 2021. “Bitcoin’s Growing e-Waste Problem.” _Resources, Conservation and Recycling_ 175: 105901. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2021.105901>.
  24. Greifeld, Katherine and Isabelle Lee. April 21, 2022. “Fidelity Bulks Up Its Thematic Lineup With Crypto and Metaverse ETFs.” _Bloomberg_. <https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-04-21/fidelity-bulks-up-thematic-lineup-with-crypto-metaverse-etfs>; Baer, Justin. September 12, 2022. “Fidelity Weighs Bitcoin Trading on Brokerage Platform.” _Wall Street Journal._<https://www.wsj.com/articles/fidelity-weighs-bitcoin-trading-on-brokerage-platform-11663008698>.
  25. Leising, Matthew. May 16, 2021. “Goldman Offers New Bitcoin Derivatives to Wall Street Investors.” _Bloomberg Law_. [https://news.bloomberglaw.com/securities-law/goldman-offers-new-Bitcoin-derivatives-to-wall-street-investors?utm_source=rss&utm_medium=SLNW&utm_campaign=00000179-42ec-d779-a37b-caffdf410003](https://news.bloomberglaw.com/securities-law/goldman-offers-new-bitcoin-derivatives-to-wall-street-investors?utm_source=rss&utm_medium=SLNW&utm_campaign=00000179-42ec-d779-a37b-caffdf410003); Bambysheva, Nina and Michael del Castillo. February 7, 2023. “How Mastercard, Goldman Sachs And Other “TradFi” Titans Are Using Blockchain To Rewire Global Finance.” _Forbes_. <https://www.forbes.com/sites/ninabambysheva/2023/02/07/how-mastercard-goldman-sachs-and-other-tradfi-titans-are-using-blockchain-to-rewire-global-finance/?sh=727a9e57339f>.
  26. Vigna, Paul. May 12, 2020. “JPMorgan Extends Banking Services to Bitcoin Exchanges.” _Wall Street Journal._<https://www.wsj.com/articles/jpmorgan-extends-banking-services-to-bitcoin-exchanges-11589281201>.
  27. Andriotis, Anna Maria. July 9, 2022. “Cryptocurrency Is Coming to Your Credit Cards.” _Wall Street Journal_. <https://www.wsj.com/articles/cryptocurrency-is-coming-to-your-credit-cards-11657374215>.
  28. UN Environmental Program. “Net-Zero Banking Alliance.”<https://www.unepfi.org/net-zero-banking/>; Alderman, Liz and Eshe Nelson. November 3, 2021. “Global finance industry says it has $130 trillion to invest in efforts to tackle climate change.” _New York Times._<https://www.nytimes.com/2021/11/03/world/europe/cop26-climate-change-finance-industry.html>.
  29. Mastercard. 2017. “Mastercard Corporate Sustainability Report – 2017.” <https://www.mastercard.us/content/dam/mccom/global/aboutus/Sustainability/mastercard-sustainability-report-2017.pdf>.
  30. Sovereign Wealth Fund Institute. 2023. “Top 100 Largest Fund Manager Rankings by Managed AUM.” <https://www.swfinstitute.org/fund-manager-rankings>; Fidelity Investments. “About Our Company.” <https://www.fidelity.com/about-fidelity/our-company>
  31. Kail, Benjamin. May 18, 2022. “Crypto key in Fidelity’s future, but ‘still a lot of uncertainty,’ CEO Abby Johnson says.” _The Business Journals – BizWomen._<https://www.bizjournals.com/bizwomen/news/latest-news/2022/05/crypto-abby-johnson.html?page=all>.
  32. Nicolle, Emily. October 21, 2022. “Fidelity Deepens Crypto Push With 100 More Hires for Unit.” _Bloomberg News._<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-10-21/fidelity-investments-crypto-unit-to-add-another-100-employees>.
  33. Bambysheva, Nina. March 16, 2023. “Amid Crypto Bank Crisis, Fidelity Expands Bitcoin, Ether Trading To Most Retail Accounts.” _Forbes_. [https://www.forbes.com/sites/digital-assets/2023/03/16/amid-crypto-bank-crisis-fidelity-opens-bitcoin-ether-trading-for-retail–accounts/?sh=2cd153761670](https://www.forbes.com/sites/digital-assets/2023/03/16/amid-crypto-bank-crisis-fidelity-opens-bitcoin-ether-trading-for-retail--accounts/?sh=2cd153761670).
  34. Bambysheva, Nina. November 4, 2022. “Fidelity Readies Retail Bitcoin, Ether Trades Without Commissions But With A Fee.” _Forbes_. [https://www.forbes.com/sites/ninabambysheva/2022/11/04/fidelity-readies-retail-Bitcoin-ether-trades-without-commissions-but-with-a-fee/?sh=107a192374c0](https://www.forbes.com/sites/ninabambysheva/2022/11/04/fidelity-readies-retail-bitcoin-ether-trades-without-commissions-but-with-a-fee/?sh=107a192374c0)
  35. Woolley, Suzanne. April 26, 2022. “Fidelity Investments Unveils a Crypto Option for 401(k) Plans.” _Bloomberg News._<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-04-26/fidelity-launches-product-for-401-k-plan-crypto-investments>.
  36. U.S. Department of Labor. March 10, 2022. “Compliance Assistance Release No. 2022-01 – 401(k) Plan Investments in ‘Cryptocurrencies.’” <https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ebsa/employers-and-advisers/plan-administration-and-compliance/compliance-assistance-releases/2022-01>.
  37. Johnson, Steve. December 2, 2021. “Fidelity set to launch physical spot Bitcoin ETF.” _Financial Times_. <https://www.ft.com/content/f2a6d440-804e-4e32-93f1-a9ee2bbf0715>.
  38. “FDIG Quote – Fidelity Crypto Industry And Digital Payments ETF.” _Bloomberg_. <https://www.bloomberg.com/quote/FDIG:US>
  39. Pan, David. February 2, 2023. “Crypto Miner Marathon Digital Made First Bitcoin Sales as Token Soared in January.” _Bloomberg News._[https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2023-02-03/crypto-miner-marathon-digital-made-first-Bitcoin-sales-as-token-soared](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2023-02-03/crypto-miner-marathon-digital-made-first-bitcoin-sales-as-token-soared); Linecker, Adelia Cellini. September 1, 2022. “Marathon Digital Holdings Stock Struggles As Bitcoin Tumbles.” _Investors Business Daily._<https://www.investors.com/news/marathon-digital-mara-stock-buy-now/>.
  40. Fidelity Investments. 2021. “2021 Environmental Report.” <https://www.fidelity.com/bin-public/060_www_fidelity_com/documents/about-fidelity/Fidelity-Investments_2021-Environmental-Report.pdf>.
  41. Fidelity Investments. September 17, 2021. “Environmental Sustainability Statement of Intent.” <https://www.fidelity.com/bin-public/060_www_fidelity_com/documents/about-fidelity/2021_Environmental_Sustainability_Statement_of_Intent.pdf>.
  42. de Vries, Alex. 2023. “Cryptocurrencies on the Road to Sustainability: Ethereum Paving the Way for Bitcoin.” Patterns 4(1). <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patter.2022.100633>.
  43. _Ibid._
  44. Sigalos, MacKenzie. June 13, 2021.“Bitcoin just got its first makeover in four years.” _CNBC._<https://www.cnbc.com/2021/06/12/bitcoin-taproot-upgrade-what-it-means.html#:~:text=Dado%20Ruvic%20%7C%20Reuters-,The%20first%20bitcoin%20upgrade%20in%20four%20years%20has%20just%20been,to%20take%20effect%20in%20November>.
  45. Castor, Amy. February 28, 2023. “Ethereum moved to proof of stake. Why can’t Bitcoin?.” _MIT Technology Review._<https://www.technologyreview.com/2023/02/28/1069190/ethereum-moved-to-proof-of-stake-why-cant-bitcoin/>.

