Forest Destruction Fuels Regional Conflicts
Environmental and social impacts of the Liberian timber industry

The timber industry in Liberia is a lucrative one – at least for a country whose estimated
Gross Domestic Product is only around US$450 million. The forestry sector raised well over
US$100 million in 20001, and it has long been one of the prime sources of Government
revenue. Following a UN ban on all diamond exports from Liberia in March 20012, it has
become an industry which provides the main source of export earnings for the Liberian
Government.

But it is also an industry that poses a major threat in the West African region, not only to the
survival of the last West African rainforests, but also to national and regional security.

Recent reports by a Panel of Experts to the UN Security Council (UNSC) reveal the Liberian
timber industry to be involved in a series of environmental and human rights abuses3. These
range from driving the destruction of the Liberia’s remaining forests to illegal arms trafficking
to the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) of Sierra Leone. In light of these revelations,
Greenpeace is calling on governments and the forest industry worldwide to stop their role in
supporting these activities, by refusing to import wood and wood products coming from
companies known to be involved in these scandals.

Liberia’s forests: the last remnants of a biodiversity hotspot

What’s at stake
Due to their accessible lowland locations and ready coastal access, most of the tropical
forests of West Africa have already undergone substantial logging activity and in many areas
these degraded forests have by now been converted to agricultural use. It is estimated that
almost 90 percent of these forests have already been destroyed and what remains is heavily
fragmented.4

After years of overharvesting in the Upper Guinean Forest Ecosystem – a rainforest belt
which once covered the whole of Liberia, plus parts of Sierra Leone, Guinea, Ivory Coast,
Ghana and Togo - Liberia’s forest now represents around 45 percent of the region’s
remaining forest. It has been identified as one of 25 threatened biodiversity ‘hotspots’ globally,
and supports many species which are found nowhere else. This forest is home to some 9,000
species of plants and more than 1,300 species of vertebrate animals. It also supports the only
viable populations of the Pygmy hippopotamus (Hexaprotodon liberiensis) and represents the
last stronghold of the forest elephant (Loxodonta africana cyclotis) in West Africa5.

Liberia’s forest is also the life-line of the country’s indigenous communities who rely on the
forest for their livelihood. It provides shelter for their cultural and religious practices including
shrines, traditional bush schools and cover for the streams, and is a vital source of foods,
medicinal herbs and other materials.

1 Estimated by Global Witness based on figures published in the World Trade Atlas: Global Witness (2001);
UNSC (2001)
2 The contribution made by the forestry sector is even more important now than in the past, following the
UNSC imposed ban on Liberia’s diamond trade in UNSC Resolution 1343 (2001) adopted on 7th March 2001
“until Liberia demonstrates convincingly that it is no longer involved in the trafficking of arms to, or diamonds
from, Sierra Leone” UNSC (2000)
3 UNSC (2000); UNSC (2001)
4 TREES (1998)
5 Peal A (2000); Myers N et al (2000)

Time to act
But this forest stronghold may not last for much longer. The European Commission’s Joint
Research Centre (EC JRC) has recently reported high levels of deforestation in Liberia’s
remaining lowland rainforests, citing intensive logging as the primary cause of forest loss6.
Meanwhile, just one company – Oriental Timber Company (OTC) – has recently been granted
logging rights to 1.6 million hectares of the country’s total 4.8 million hectares of forest. That’s
one third of the country’s remaining forest7. According to the Liberian Forest Development
Authority (FDA), a total of around 3 million hectares of the forest (63 %) have already been
allocated to 25 logging companies.

        Timber Export Values – Liberia 1996-2000

Liberian Wood Exports

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

n
o

i
l
l
i

m
$
S
U

1997
Source: World Trade Atlans cited in Global Witness (2001)

1999

1998

1996

2000

Recent figures reveal that the Liberian timber trade has expanded dramatically over the last 5
years, the income generated by timber exports rising from US$5 million to at least US$ 100
million annually8. This rapid expansion in Liberia’s logging industry has resulted in an industry
which is essentially unregulated. The direct and indirect implications of an unregulated
industry operating at this level of forest exploitation will be severe, including loss of habitats
and species, human displacement and cultural erosion and the long-term effects resulting
from deforestation such as floods, droughts and changes in regional and global climate.

Liberia’s forest industry and regional security

In December 2000, a meeting of a Panel of Experts to the UN Security Council (UNSC)
named Liberia’s timber industry as one of several regional players involved in illegally
supplying arms to RUF rebels in its war-torn neighbour, Sierra Leone, in defiance of existing
UN sanctions9. The report revealed that the Liberian timber industry was involved in a series
of illicit activities including the acquisition of weapons, and noted that roads built and
maintained for timber exploitation were also used to move weapons from Liberia to Sierra
Leone. The meeting recommended a temporary embargo on Liberian timber exports “until
Liberia could convincingly demonstrate that it was no longer involved in the trafficking of arms
to, or diamonds from, Sierra Leone”. However, early in 2001, China and France – the two
main importers of Liberian timber10 – objected to the inclusion of timber sanctions, which was
subsequently excluded from the final report11.

6 TREES (1998)
7 UNSC (2000)
8 Global Witness (2001) reports total timber production in 2000 of 934,000 cubic metres, with a world market
value of US$187 million. However, both Global Witness (2000) and UNSC (2001) note that official statistics
are likely to underestimate real exports by 50 to 200 percent as a result of tax evasion and undeclared timber
flowing through the Ivory Coast.

9 UNSC (2000)
10 In 2000, China (45%) and France (26%) were responsible for more than two thirds of Liberia’s timber
imports (World Trade Atlas cited in Global Witness 2001)
11 Pratt D (2001)

Since then, the British-based environmental and human rights organisation, Global Witness,
and the UNSC have both released compelling evidence linking Liberia’s President Charles
Taylor and the Liberian timber industry to the illegal trade in arms12. Their work reveals that:

•

taxes from the logging industry have been used by Taylor to maintain brutal paramilitary
units involved in human rights abuses

•  Taylor tried to acquire several thousand ak 47 assault rifles and an unknown quantity of

•

rpg-7 rocket-propelled grenades from Libya in May 2001
logging companies have been recruiting and arming ex-combatants – often from Taylor’s
now defunct National Patriotic Front – to build up private militias

•  a number of companies employ indiscriminate logging practices which show no regard

for their environmental or social impact

Forest destroyers and arms dealers: who’s involved?
Of some 25 companies producing timber in Liberia, there is strong evidence against several
which are guilty of either causing environmental damage, abusing human rights, running
private militia and/or trafficking illegal arms to RUF rebels in Sierra Leone.

The largest – the Oriental Timber Company – is also the most notorious. Other companies
implicated in one or more of these scandals include the Royal Timber Corp (RTC),
Mohammed Group of Companies (MGC) and INLAND Logging Company (ILC). In addition,
the UNSC report from December 2000, named three companies known to be “providing a
large amount of unrecorded extrabudgetary income to President Taylor for unspecified
purposes”: Exotic and Tropical Timber Enterprise (ETTE), FORUM Liberia and OTC.

Key Player: Oriental Timber Company13
OTC, which is closely linked to the Hong-Kong based Global Star Holdings, is by far the
largest and most notorious logging company operating in Liberia. It is a company whose
operations are characterised by corruption, illegality and total disregard for the environmental
or social impact of their indiscriminate logging practices.

Key companies involved in Liberia’s forestry scandals

Company

Description

Oriental Timber Company
(OTC)

Royal Timber Corp (RTC)

Mohammed Group of
Companies (MGC)

INLAND Logging
Company (ILC)

By far the largest – and most notorious – logging company operating in Liberia. It is run
by Dutch national Gus Kouwenhoven, a close associate of President Taylor.
Kowenhoven has been described as “responsible for the logistical aspects of many of
the arms deals [with the Revolutionary United Front, Sierra Leone].
The second largest timber operation in Liberia, RTC is also run by Gus Kouwenhoven,
and is believed to have vastly under-reported its timber production in the last two
years.
Two companies – Salami Molowi Inc (SMI) and Bureaux Ivorian Ngorian (BIN) – owned
by Mohammed Salamé, a Liberian based in Ivory Coast. Salamé has been involved in
assisting sanctions-busting arms transfers to Liberia.
Managed by Maurice and Oscar Cooper, both long-term associates of President
Taylor. The company reports that it exported around 20,000 cubic metres of logs in
2000, but there are indications that this figure was actually much higher - nearer
50,000 cubic metres. The ILC has a private militia, which harasses and intimidates
local communities in Sinoe County.

Sources: UNSC (2000); Global Witness (2001)

OTC is believed to have paid somewhere between US$ 3 and 5 million to President Taylor to
obtain its huge concession – the largest in Liberia’s history. Yet despite yielding hundreds of
thousands of cubic metres of valuable timber each year, the concession agreement has never
been ratified by the Liberian Congress – and is thus not legally valid.

12 Global Witness (2001) UNSC (2001)
13 Information from Global Witness (2001) unless stated otherwise.

OTC has built several dozens of criss-crossing roads throughout Liberia’s pristine forest,
without conducting a single impact study, and has operated in flagrant violation of the FDA
and its contractual regulations. It has invaded neighbouring concessions, and appears to be
opening up between 5,000 and 10,000 hectares of undisturbed forest every month. That’s an
area the size of almost 500 soccer pitches every day.

The company also operates in violation of national labour laws, particularly regarding worker
safety. It has shown a total disregard for the rights and customs of local people, and has met
local government officials and the FDA with police intimidation and arrest. It also operates a
private militia whose members are armed with AK-47s.

OTC’s Dutch president, Gus Kouwenhoven, has been described as “responsible for the
logistical aspects of many of the arms deals [with the Revolutionary United Front, Sierra
Leone].”14 He also runs the Royal Timber Corporation (RTC) in the northwest of the country,
which is strategically located on the border with Sierra Leone. In March 2001 the UNSC
imposed sanctions on Liberia for its role in blocking the peace process in Sierra Leone. The
measures imposed included restricting the travel of certain individuals – including
Kouwenhoven.

Public outcry against OTC has been widespread in both national and international press. Yet
President Taylor continues to defend OTC, and has responded to criticism with measures
such as removing people from office, police intimidation and arrests on the grounds of threats
to national security.

Driving the industry

Since at least 70 percent of the wood produced in Liberia is destined for the export market15,
the key actors driving this destructive, corrupt and destabilising industry, are clearly the
countries importing the timber coming from these companies.

Traditionally, Liberia exported logs largely to Europe. But today, this market has shifted
increasingly to Asia as newly arrived companies such as OTC have concentrated more on
selling materials to plywood and other processing factories that supply the South-East Asian
markets. According to official figures16 China (45%) was by far the largest importer of Liberian
timber in 2000, followed by France (26%) and Italy (12%). In total, the EU was responsible for
more than 50 percent of imports in 2000.

Timber imports from Liberia (2000)
Importing country
China
France
Italy
Greece
Netherlands
Spain
TOTAL
Source: World Trade Atlas cited in Global Witness (2001)

Volume imported (m3)
290,409
167,779
78,800
23,513
21,677
15,238

Importing country
Indonesia
Portugal
Germany
Turkey
UK
Belgium

645,541

Volume imported (m3)
13,401
13,171
12,364
3,998
3,108
2,083

Greenpeace call for action

In the run up to next year’s Ancient Forest Summit17, Greenpeace is urgently calling on World

14 Global Witness (2001); UNSC (2000)
15 This is based on a production figure of 934,006 m3 (Central Bank of Liberia) and total exports of 645,541 m3
(World Trade Atlas). Both sources cited in Global Witness (2001).
16 World Trade Atlas cited in Global Witness (2001)
17 The Ancient Forest Summit is the 6th Conference of Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity. It will
be held in April next year, in The Hague, The Netherlands and will have a mandate to agree a 10 year

Governments to:

•

•

•

stop the destruction – by stopping any further industrial activities in intact ancient forest
until responsible plans for forest conservation and sustainable use have been agreed
clean up the timber trade – by ensuring that timber is produced and traded in a legal and
ecologically responsible way
come up with the money – by providing at least US$15 billion each year to pay for forest
conservation and sustainable development

In the light of the evidence implicating Liberian logging companies in illegal and destructive
logging and revealing their role as a threat to regional security, Greenpeace is urging the
governments of all importing countries to immediately stop their role in the destruction of
Liberian forests. To this end, governments must start demanding that all wood and wood
products entering national ports must come from legal and well-managed forest operations
according to high social and ecological standards18.

References
Global Witness and International Transport Workers Federation (2001).Taylor-made: the pivotal role of Liberia’s

forests and flag of convenience in regional conflict. September 2001
http://www.oneworld.org/globalwitness/liberia/liberia_report_cover.htm

Myers N et al (2000) Biodiversity hotspots for conservation priorities. Nature 403 853-858.
Peal A (2000) Green spot in Africa. In: Topfer K (ed). Our Planet. The Environment Millenium. UNEP.

www.ourplanet.com

Pratt D (2001) Sierra Leone: Danger and opportunity in a regional conflict. Report to Canada’s Minister of Foreign

Affairs

TREES (1998) Identification of deforestation hot spot areas in the humid tropics. TREES Publications Series B.

Research Report No 4. JRC EC, Luxembourg

UNSC (2000) Report of the Panel of Experts Appointed Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1306 (2000),

Paragraph 19, in Relation to Sierra Leone S/2000/1195 December 20, 2000
http://www.un.org/Depts/dpko/dpko/reports.htm

UNSC (2001) Report of the Panel of Experts Pursuant to Security Council Resolution 1343 (2001), paragraph 19,

concerning Liberia, October 2001
http://www.un.org/Docs/sc/committees/Liberia2/LiberiaSelEng.htm

programme on forests in preparation for Rio + 10 which will take place in Johannesburg in September 2002.
18 The Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) is currently the only international certification and labelling system
that uses globally endorsed ecological performance standards, ensures a traceable chain-of-custody from
production to final consumption and brings together a broad range of environment, social and economic
stakeholder interests.

