# Fossil Fuel Racism: How phasing out oil, gas, and coal can protect communities

![Marshall Steam Station](https://storage.googleapis.com/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/11997a28-gp03jof_medium_res_with_credit_line.jpg)United
States flags and smoke billowing from the chimney at the Marshall Steam
Station. Operating since 1965, this coal-fired power station has a
2,090-megawatt generating capacity and emitted 11.5 million tons of carbon
dioxide in 2011.

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/aa6c796d-greenpeace-logo.png)

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/7245d14e-cover-gcclp-logo-transparent-1.png)

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/76003500-m4bl-logo-3.png)

## Table of contents

  * Executive summary
  * Introduction
  * Environmental justice
  * Fossil fuels and air pollutants
  * Fossil fuel phaseout
  * Extraction
    * Oil and gas extraction
    * Coal mining
  * Processing and transport
    * Oil refining, natural gas processing, and petrochemical manufacturing
    * Pipelines and terminals
  * Combustion
    * General exposure to criteria air pollution
    * Coal and natural gas power plants
    * Mobile sources and traffic exposure
  * Climate impacts
  * Policy recommendations
    * End fossil fuel racism and reverse the legacies of historical injustices
    * Phase out fossil fuel production
    * Ensure no worker or community is left behind
    * Enact a green and just economic recovery
    * Protect and expand our democracy to make it work for all people
  * Acknowledgements
  * Endnotes

## Executive Summary

Fossil fuels — coal, oil, and gas — lie at the heart of the crises we face,
including public health, racial injustice, and climate change. This report
synthesizes existing research and provides new analysis that finds that the
fossil fuel industry contributes to public health harms that kill hundreds of
thousands of people in the U.S. each year and disproportionately endanger
Black, Brown, Indigenous, and poor communities. President Joe Biden and the
117th Congress have a historic opportunity to improve public health, tackle
the climate crisis, and confront systemic racism at the same time by phasing
out fossil fuel production and use.

Each stage of the life cycles of oil, gas, and coal — extraction, processing,
transport, and combustion — generates toxic air and water pollution, as well
as greenhouse gas emissions that drive the global climate crisis. Exposure to
fossil fuel pollution is linked to negative health impacts for people living
near these pollution sources. The impacts of climate change are also strongly
linked with rising health risks and threaten the ability of humans to live in
various regions of the planet. The public health hazards from air and water
pollution, and risks associated with climate change, fall disproportionately
on Black, Latinx, Indigenous, Asian, and poor communities.

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/78b71ae4-gp03jqr_medium_res_with_credit_line-1024x683.jpg)Smoke
billowing from the chimney at the Marshall Steam Station. Operating since
1965, this coal-fired power station has a 2,090-megawatt generating capacity
and emitted 11.5 million tons of carbon dioxide in 2011.

In addition to the accumulated negative impact on human health and the
environment, fossil fuels depend on and contribute to the legacy of systemic
racism in the United States. Oil, gas, and coal activity in the United States
takes place on the ancestral lands of Indigenous peoples, making the fossil
fuel industry complicit beneficiaries of the forced removal and genocide of
Indigenous peoples. Racist practices such as redlining and housing
discrimination, longstanding social and racial inequalities, colonization,
Indigenous genocide and removal, and elected officials who are beholden to
corporate power all combine to create a system in which the most dangerous
impacts of pollution fall most heavily on the most disadvantaged, particularly
Black, Brown, Indigenous, and poor communities.

More recently, the COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated the disproportionate
burden shouldered by these ** _historically targeted communities_** across the
United States, including by magnifying the health risks of air pollution from
fossil fuels.

Tackling this ** _fossil fuel racism_** would go a long way to address our
present overlapping crises and correct the injustices that historically
targeted communities have faced. A**_fossil fuel phaseout_** — an immediate
halt to new extraction and infrastructure build-out and managed wind-down of
existing production that prioritizes the needs of affected workers and
communities — is necessary to end fossil fuel racism and fully address the
public health, racial injustice, and climate crises.

Research shows that phasing out fossil fuels will deliver immediate public
health improvements to historically targeted communities. Furthermore, any
serious policy to address the climate crisis will inevitably require rapid
reductions in fossil fuel consumption and production. But, policies that
narrowly focus on carbon reductions without considering the full effects of
greenhouse gas-emitting sources could fail to reduce local air and water
pollution and end up perpetuating the racially inequitable impacts of the
fossil fuel economy. Poorly designed climate policies could exacerbate
pollution disparities and concentrate pollution in community “hotspots” even
as overall carbon emissions decline. A fossil fuel phaseout would ensure air
and water pollution as well as greenhouse gas emissions are reduced as part of
a comprehensive response to the climate crisis.

President Joe Biden, the 117th Congress, and the nation have a mandate to
transform our economy to repair past injustices and build a better future in
which all communities can thrive. This decade will be crucial for putting our
economy on a climate-safe trajectory, and the next year is a critical window
for action to put us on the right track. President Biden can fulfill his
promises to confront systemic racism, tackle the climate crisis, and Build
Back Better by initiating a fossil fuel phaseout.

This report gives an overview of recent scientific studies and analyses of the
harms due to fossil fuels and their disproportionate impact on Black, Brown,
Indigenous, and poor communities in the United States. The report also
contributes new analysis of the disproportionate impacts of toxic pollution
from petroleum refineries and petrochemical facilities on Black, Brown, and
poor communities. The report reviews impacts from each phase of the fossil
fuel life cycle — extraction, processing, transport, combustion — and climate
change impacts.

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/e4974a5c-gp0442u_medium_res_with_credit_line-1024x683.jpg)Explosive
Water from Fracturing in USA. Sherrie Vargson ignites the water coming out of
her kitchen faucet in Bradford County. Methane in her well has caused her
health problems. The well is just 100 feet from her house.

### Key findings include:

**_Burning fossil fuels harms public health, disproportionately impacting
Black, Brown, Indigenous, and poor communities:_**

  * Harmful air pollution from the burning of fossil fuels (especially particulate matter and ground-level ozone) is a well-established health threat associated with respiratory and cardiovascular risks and premature mortality.[[1]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftn1)
  * In 2018 in the United States, there were roughly 355,000 premature deaths due to fossil fuel-linked air pollution,[[2]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftn2) carrying an economic cost of hundreds of billions of dollars.
  * People of color, especially Black/African-American people, and poor people are found to bear a disproportionately high burden of fossil fuel pollution across the United States. Black/African-American people have 1.54 times the exposure to particulate matter compared to the overall population.[[3]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftn3)
  * Key sources for particulate pollution include coal-fired power plants[[4]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftn4) and vehicle transportation,[[5]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftn5) each of which disproportionately impacts Black, Brown, Indigenous, and poor communities.

**_Oil and gas extraction releases hazardous air pollutants that
disproportionately burden Black, Brown, Indigenous, and poor communities:_**

  * The extraction and processing of oil and gas is associated with emissions of a wide range of hazardous air pollutants, including carcinogens such as benzene and endocrine disruptors.[[6]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftn6)
  * Nationally, 17.6 million people live within one mile of an active oil or gas well[[7]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftn7) — more than the populations of New York City, Los Angeles, Chicago, and Houston combined. More than 6.1 million people live within three miles of an oil and gas refinery.[[8]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftn8)
  * Emerging scientific studies have linked exposure to oil and gas activity with negative health impacts including elevated cancer risk,[[9]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftn9) pregnancy complications, and respiratory and cardiovascular disease.[[10]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftn10)
  * New analysis of the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) Toxics Release Inventory finds that oil refineries and petrochemical facilities (which provide key inputs for plastics production) are among the worst polluting sectors of the economy, and that the toxic burden of those sectors falls disproportionately on Black, Brown, Indigenous, and poor communities.[[11]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftn11)
  * Although findings vary by region, oil and gas extraction is also found to have disproportionate impacts on people of color, especially Black/African-American people.[[12]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftn12)

**_Phasing out fossil fuels would immediately improve public health, tackle
the climate crisis, and address historical injustices._**

  * Many of the same communities dealing with the toxic legacy of fossil fuels are also on the front lines of rising climate impacts. Studies have shown that extreme heat in urban areas puts Black, Brown, Indigenous, and poor communities at disproportionate risk of premature deaths and birth complications.[[13]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftn13)
  * Recent studies reveal a relationship between racist policies of the past, such as redlining and housing discrimination, and pollution and climate impacts such as extreme heat,[[14]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftn14) asthma,[[15]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftn15) and flooding.
  * The COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated the disproportionate impacts of fossil fuel pollution. Black/African-American and other people of color have been more likely to die from the disease. Preliminary science indicates that long-standing inequalities in exposure to air pollution could be an especially deadly risk factor for COVID19.
  * Some studies show that restoration — undoing the public health harms of fossil fuel pollution — is possible. By taking advantage of “natural experiments” when refineries and power plants are retired, researchers have found measurable improvements in the health of nearby communities.
  * Policies to address climate change by phasing out fossil fuels can have immediate local benefits to public health and lower the upfront costs of climate action.

**_Local and regional case studies of fossil fuel production in highly
impacted areas shed greater light on the dangers to nearby communities:_**

  * In south Texas, fracking wastewater wells[[16]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftn16) and oil and gas flares[[17]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftn17) disproportionately harm Latinx communities. Latina women in the Eagle Ford shale — the site of a major fracking boom — face significantly higher risk of giving birth prematurely.[[18]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftn18)
  * If completed, the proposed Formosa petrochemical plant in St. James, Louisiana, would likely double toxic air pollution (including carcinogenic benzene and ethylene oxide) in the region, which already bears the nickname “Cancer Alley” following decades of industrial pollution.
  * Closing an oil refinery in the Toronto, Canada, suburb of Oakville eliminated 6,000 tons of sulfur dioxide pollution per year and helped reduce hospitalizations for respiratory illnesses in the area.[[19]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftn19)
  * In Richmond, California — a predominantly Black and Latinx city in the San Francisco Bay Area — emergency room visits increased sevenfold after a major fire at Chevron’s Richmond Refinery in 2012.[[20]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftn20)
  * After a series of coal and oil power plants were closed across California in the early 2000s, researchers found a significant decline in preterm births for women living in nearby communities.[[21]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftn21)

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/34219e22-gp02mkj_medium_res_with_credit_line-1024x678.jpg)Playground
and Chemical Plant in Lousiana. Playground built by Shell. Chemical plant is
visible in the background.

President Biden and Congress must confront the overlapping crises we face with
a holistic approach to improve public health, tackle the climate crisis, and
rectify our legacy of systemic racism by phasing out fossil fuel production.
Our policy recommendations are rooted in Greenpeace USA’s [ _Just Recovery
Agenda_](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/greenpeace-usas-just-recovery-
agenda/)and The Movement for Black Lives’  _Red, Black, and Green New Deal_
platform. A full list of policy recommendations can be found in Chapter 8. In
brief, to truly Build Back Better, President Biden and Congress must:

  1. **End fossil fuel racism and reverse the legacies of historical injustices.** Require air and water pollution reductions in environmental justice communities with a “No Hotspots” policy and policies to mitigate cumulative pollution impacts. Pass the  _Environmental Justice For All Act_ and  _Climate Equity Act_ , and institutionalize Free, Prior, and Informed Consent regarding federal actions affecting the lands, livelihoods, culture, and spirituality of Indigenous peoples.
  2. **Phase out fossil fuel production.** Pass the  _End Polluter Welfare Act_ to eliminate federal fossil fuel subsidies, halt new fossil fuel leases and permits on public lands and waters, and reject new federal fossil fuel infrastructure permits. Pass the  _Break Free from Plastic Pollution Act_. Reinstate the crude oil export ban and prohibit exports of liquified natural gas and coal.
  3. **Ensure no worker or community is left behind.** Pass the  _Protecting the Right to Organize (PRO) Act_ to protect and expand the right of workers to organize. Mandate the use of project labor agreements, Davis-Bacon prevailing wage requirements, community benefit agreements, and high-road labor standards in any federally funded project. Create 250,00 high-quality job-years under a federal oil and gas well remediation program. Establish a federal Energy Worker and Community Protection Fund to guarantee wage, benefit, and pension protections for workers affected by the transition away from fossil fuels, replace lost tax and community revenue, and promote community revitalization and economic development.
  4. **Enact a green and just economic recovery.** Pass the  _THRIVE Act_ to invest at least $1 trillion per year for the next decade to create 15 million good jobs, cut climate pollution in half by 2030, ensure at least 50% of new investments directly benefit frontline and disadvantaged communities, ensure federal investments pass a rigorous environmental justice and equity screen to avoid exacerbating “pollution hotspots,” and uphold rigorous labor, climate, and equity standards.
  5. **Protect and expand our democracy to make it work for all people.** Pass the  _For the People Act_(H.R.1 / S.1) and  _John Lewis Voting Rights Act_(H.R. 4) to give more electoral power to the people and protect against racist voter suppression tactics. End the Jim Crow filibuster. Enact the  _BREATHE Act_ to protect communities from police brutality and racial injustice by investing in Black communities and re-imagining community safety.

Systemic racism and white supremacy have plagued the United States since
colonization and have influenced the development of all aspects of society and
law, including education, health, work, housing, policing, and more. Our
energy systems are no different. The urgency of the interlocking crises we
face today gives us an opening to build a better system based on science and
justice.

## Introduction

President Joe Biden and the 117th Congress are confronting multiple
overlapping crises, which offer an opportunity and duty to significantly re-
orient our economy to improve public health, repair past injustices, combat
the climate crisis, and build a better future for all. According to the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), the world must cut its
carbon dioxide emissions (CO2) in half this decade in order to have a chance
at limiting warming to
1.5°C.[[22]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn22) The COVID-19 pandemic and unprecedented economic crisis have
thrust relief and recovery to the forefront of governmental agendas. The
pandemic has further exposed the myriad ways in which the ongoing climate,
public health, air pollution, housing, economic, and systemic racism crises
intersect and bring harm to historically targeted Black, Brown, Indigenous,
and poor communities.

Fossil fuels — oil, gas, and coal — lie at the center of these overlapping
crises. Each stage of the life cycles of fossil fuels — extraction,
processing, transport, and combustion — generates toxic air and water
pollution, as well as greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions that drive the global
climate crisis.[[23]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn23) Decades of research have established that the air pollution
and climate change impacts of fossil fuels harm public health and fall
disproportionately on Black, Latinx, Indigenous, Asian, and other communities
of color and poor communities.

Fossil fuel corporations also depend on and contribute to the legacy of
systemic racism in the United
States.[[24]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn24) Racist practices such as redlining and housing discrimination,
long-standing social and racial inequalities, colonization, Indigenous
genocide and removal, and elected officials who are beholden to corporate
power all combine to create a system where the most dangerous impacts of
fossil fuel pollution fall most heavily on the most historically targeted
communities.

This is ** _fossil fuel racism_** in action.

Understanding the fossil fuel industry’s deep role in perpetuating racial
injustice, public health harms, and the climate crisis is essential to
advancing the most effective approach to mitigating the defining challenges of
our time. Any comprehensive plan to address our present overlapping crises
must include a ** _fossil fuel phaseout_** : a swift halt to new extraction
and a managed wind-down of existing production in a way that prioritizes the
needs of workers and communities.

Effective action to combat the global climate crisis will necessarily require
sharp reductions in fossil fuel production and consumption in the coming
decades. Policies to mitigate climate change should not be judged solely by
the metric of carbon emissions, but also by their reductions in air and water
pollution and their restoration of communities harmed by decades of industrial
pollution. A fossil fuel phaseout would help ensure that efforts to tackle the
climate crisis also maximize public health benefits at all stages of our
energy systems, and begin to rectify historical injustices.

![Shell Refinery in Louisiana. © Les Stone /
Greenpeace](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/29c063e5-gp0o99-1024x679.jpg)Clara Smith, 96, stands at the
window of her home looking out at Shell refinery just a couple of yards
(meters) away. © Les Stone / Greenpeace

**This report provides a new comprehensive synthesis of the fossil fuel
industry’s embedded contributions to our present crises, with a focus on the
harmful and unequal impacts of deadly air pollution**.

_Chapter 1_ opens with a brief overview of the environmental justice (EJ)
movement — the beating heart of this nation’s struggle to correct a legacy of
environmental racism.  _Chapter 2_ lays out the primary air pollutants
associated with fossil fuels and discusses the data and types of scientific
analyses that investigate their prevalence and effects.  _Chapter 3_ further
discusses the concept of  _fossil fuel phaseout_ , and argues that this is a
necessary approach to tackling the climate crisis and racial injustice in
tandem.

In  _Chapters 4-7_ , we review recent scientific studies and analyses of the
harms fossil fuels pose to public health, and their disproportionate impacts
on Black, Brown, Indigenous, and poor communities in the United States. We
also contribute new analysis of the disproportionate impacts of toxic
pollution from petroleum refineries and petrochemical facilities on Black,
Brown, and poor communities. These chapters are organized to review impacts at
each stage of the fossil fuel lifecycle:

  * **Extraction** , including oil and gas drilling and fracking, and coal mining;
  * **Processing & Transport**, including oil refining, natural gas processing, petrochemical manufacturing, pipelines, and terminals;
  * **Combustion** , including point sources such as power plants, industrial facilities, and mobile sources; and
  * **Climate Impacts** , due specifically to greenhouse gas emissions associated with all parts of the fossil fuel lifecycle.

Finally,  _Chapter 8_ provides detailed policy recommendations for President
Joe Biden and the 117th Congress. To truly Build Back Better and address
public health, systemic racism, and the climate crisis together, President
Biden and Congress must:

  1. **End fossil fuel racism and reverse the legacies of historical injustices.**
  2. **Phase out fossil fuel production.**
  3. **Ensure no worker or community is left behind.**
  4. **Enact a green and just economic recovery.**
  5. **Protect and expand our democracy to make it work for all people.**

## 1\. Environmental justice

The unequal distribution of pollution has long been recognized by Black,
Indigenous, Latinx, Asian, and other communities of color and poor communities
across the United States, many of which organized to protect themselves and
stop corporate
dumping.[[25]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn25) Community protests in 1982 opposing plans to create a landfill
for PCB-contaminated soil in majority-Black Warren County, NC, are often cited
as the birth of the Environmental Justice movement. A landmark 1987 study
released by the United Church of Christ Commission for Racial Justice was the
first to correlate hazardous waste sites with
race.[[26]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn26) Its publication brought the terms  _environmental racism_ and
_environmental justice_ (EJ) into the national conversation.

Today, after deep thought leadership from Dr. Robert Bullard, Dr. Beverly
Wright, and other scholars, environmental justice is well established as a key
framework for understanding environmental goals and
policy.[[27]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn27) Environmental Justice also comprises a social movement
directly led by people living on the front lines of industrial activities who
face the consequences of racism, consolidated corporate power, and pollution
everyday.[[28]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn28) These ** _historically targeted communities_** are
predominantly Black/African-American, Latinx, Indigenous, Asian, and/or poor.
The Environmental Justice movement has forced national leaders and the public
at large to place greater focus on the ways in which race and class intersect
with our capitalist economy and political systems, and has challenged the
structure, funding, and priorities of largely white-led environmental
organizations.

During the 2020 campaign, combating environmental racism became a required
component of many Democratic presidential candidates’ climate platforms. Joe
Biden’s campaign pledged to make it a priority to “engage in community-driven
approaches to develop solutions for environmental injustices affecting
communities of color, low-income, and indigenous
communities.”[[29]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn29) Yet, despite the growing power of the Environmental Justice
movement, local pollution risks remain a persistent problem and communities
all across the United States and around the world are still fighting to end
pollution in their
neighborhoods.[[30]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn30)

Sophisticated analyses of environmental racism have not always translated into
concrete policy action, often because Environmental Justice communities are
denied access to the political and economic power needed to rein in corporate
polluters and enact people-first solutions. At the same time, policymakers
often become beholden to corporate influence instead of the will of the voters
who elect them. Indeed, gerrymandering and laws designed to suppress voter
turnout systematically reduce the political influence of many of these
communities.[[31]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn31)

Fossil fuel corporations are key contributors to environmental injustice, as
this report demonstrates, but Environmental Justice issues go beyond fossil
fuels. Many early Environmental Justice fights and analyses were focused on
incinerators, landfills, and hazardous waste sites. Industrial agriculture and
heavy industries such as metal manufacturing have also been the focus of
community action. More recently, the Flint, Michigan, water crisis has
underscored the toxic legacy of lead in the environment, whether it is found
in water pipes, contaminated soil, or paint in old buildings. The
Environmental Justice concept extends as broadly as the definition of the
environment itself, encompassing disparities in access to nature, access to
housing and transit, noise and light pollution, and more.

Amidst these myriad Environmental Justice issues, fossil fuels remain a toxic
presence in modern life. Our current intersecting crises arise out of a legacy
of systemic racism from which fossil fuel corporations benefit and to which
they contribute. The geography of housing and economic activity in the United
States has been profoundly shaped by past practices of redlining (the
practice, technically outlawed in 1968, of concentrating Black/African-
American and other minority homeowners in certain areas by refusing housing
loans)[[32]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn32), housing discrimination, and job discrimination. The U.S.
health system is also plagued by many of the same concerns about systemic
racism and
inequality.[[33]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn33) Nationally, Black/African-American people are 40 percent more
likely to have asthma and are almost three times more likely to die of
“asthma-related causes” than the non-Hispanic white
population.[[34]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn34)

Oil, gas, and coal activity in the United States takes place on the ancestral
lands of Indigenous peoples, making the fossil fuel industry complicit
beneficiaries of the forced removal and genocide of Indigenous peoples. The
first U.S. oil well, the Drake Well, was drilled in 1859 on ancestral
Haudenosaunee (Iroquois)
territory[[35]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn35) near Titusville, Pennsylvania, by a company ironically named
the Seneca Oil
Company.[[36]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn36)

By its nature, this summary is a reductive look at the public health impacts
of fossil fuel-related air pollution and, by itself, does not deeply explore
the ways in which these issues overlap and intersect with each other and other
systems such as housing, employment, health care, immigration, and more. For
example, the report does not fully explore ways in which the geography of
fossil fuel extraction intersects with the history of colonization and
Indigenous genocide and removal, including means by which those injustices
have led to disparate impacts, harm to sacred places, and cultural and
spiritual health harm.

Analyses to date have tended to take a piecemeal approach to examining the
role of the coal, oil, and gas industries in perpetuating pollution, climate
change, and environmental injustice. This report seeks to contribute to the
literature by providing a comprehensive overview of the health impacts and
disproportionate burdens of air pollution and climate impacts of fossil fuels
at each stage of the coal, oil, and gas lifecycles.

![Toxic Patrol in Baton Rouge. © Robert Visser /
Greenpeace](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/12/ce2f0c4e-gp018k5.jpg)The Greenpeace toxic patrol, lead by
Damu Smith, protests against the toxics industry with a banner reading:
‘Environmental Justice Now’ which is displayed along with other banners as the
activists protest through the street. © Robert Visser / Greenpeace

**There is robust evidence, across a wide variety of contexts and scales, that
polluting industries impose health burdens on their neighbors and that these
risks are generally higher for Black, Brown, Indigenous, and poor
communities.**[[37]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn37),[[38]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-
racism/#_ftn38),[[39]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-
racism/#_ftn39),[[40]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-
racism/#_ftn40),[[41]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-racism/#_ftn41) Many of these studies have examined cumulative or
aggregate impacts; some studies have also summarized health and distributive
justice information along fossil fuel supply
chains.[[42]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn42),[[43]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-
racism/#_ftn43),[[44]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-racism/#_ftn44) This report synthesizes a wide range of recent scientific
studies to paint an integrated picture of the fossil fuel industry’s role in
modern society and its legacy of racial, environmental, and economic
injustice.

This report is focused on the U.S. context, but many of the same issues arise
across the globe.[[45]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-racism/#_ftn45) Indeed, the history of the oil industry is closely
intertwined with the history of colonialism, war, and global
geopolitics.[[46]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn46),[[47]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-
racism/#_ftn47),[[48]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-racism/#_ftn48) Energy and industrial systems are global in nature, and
as fossil fuel supply chains stretch across national borders, so too do the
harms that result from that
activity.[[49]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn49) With the increasing focus on climate change, the concept of
climate justice, along both global and generational axes, has also come to the
forefront.

The COVID-19 pandemic has also exposed the stakes of inequality, as
Black/African American people and other people of color have been more likely
to die from the
disease.[[50]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn50) Although scientific studies have only begun to probe
connections between oil and gas development, air pollution, systemic racism,
and COVID-19, there are preliminary indications that the mix of factors could
be especially
deadly.[[51]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn51),[[52]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-racism/#_ftn52) One preliminary study found that even small increases in
long-term air pollution exposure were associated with higher COVID-19 death
rates.[[53]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn53) As we discuss in detail in this report, Black, Brown,
Indigenous, and poor communities have been exposed to higher levels of
pollution for decades, in many cases reflecting historical discrimination and
redlining.[[54]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn54)

The [Environmental
Justice](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/issues/environmental-justice/)
movement has elevated long-overlooked disparities and injustices to the
forefront of a national reckoning with the legacy of creating “sacrifice
zones” that trade the health of Black, Brown, Indigenous, and poor communities
for corporate profits. We hope this report echoes and strengthens the demands
from historically targeted communities to move beyond this sordid legacy and
create a future in which all communities can thrive.

## 2\. Fossil fuels and air pollutants

Although we touch upon water pollution, land use, and other harms due to the
fossil fuel industry, the bulk of this report focuses on air pollution.

The Clean Air Act draws a distinction between  _criteria air pollutants_
(widespread pollutants with regional impacts) and  _hazardous air pollutants_
(typically considered to be more local in their impacts). Above and beyond
their greenhouse gas emissions fueling the climate crisis, fossil fuel
production and use generates both criteria and hazardous air pollutants.

There are six criteria air
pollutants[[55]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn55) regulated under the National Ambient Air Quality Standards
(NAAQS):

  * **Particulate matter** , subdivided into PM5 (fine particulates) and PM10, and sometimes commonly referred to as “soot.” Particulates can be generated by combustion and from other sources such as unpaved roads and agricultural fields. PM can also be formed from precursor pollutants such as nitrogen oxide (NOx) and sulfur dioxide (SO2).[[56]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftn56)
  * **Nitrogen dioxide** (NO2) is commonly grouped with other nitrogen oxides and termed NOx. Nitrogen dioxide is primarily generated by combustion of fossil fuels.[[57]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftn57)
  * **Sulfur dioxide** (SO2) is also primarily generated by combustion of fossil fuels.[[58]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftn58)
  * **Ground-level ozone** (O3) is distinguished from stratospheric ozone, which makes up Earth’s “ozone layer.” Ground-level ozone is not directly emitted to the atmosphere, but is formed by chemical reactions between NOx and volatile organic compounds (VOCs) in the presence of heat and sunlight.[[59]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftn59) Because ozone formation is affected by temperature, evidence suggests that climate change will itself impose a “climate penalty” and lead to higher ozone levels.[[60]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftn60)
  * **Carbon monoxide** (CO) is formed when something is burned, and the largest source of outdoor CO is fossil fuel combustion.[[61]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftn61)
  * **Lead** (Pb) air emissions were successfully reduced by 98% from 1980 to 2014 thanks to U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) regulations that eliminated lead in gasoline.[[62]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftn62)

All of these criteria pollutants are potentially generated as a consequence of
the  _combustion_ of fossil fuels, with PM2.5, ozone, and NOx being of
particular concern. Because criteria pollutants are associated with mobile
sources and a wide range of stationary sources, their pollution is generally
more widespread and can degrade regional and national air quality.

The Clean Air Act also regulates hazardous air pollutants (also known as “air
toxics” or HAPs), of which there are 187 substances under scrutiny, from a
wide range of sources including fossil
fuels.[[63]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn63) These pollutants are often associated with specific
facilities, and are regulated differently than the criteria pollutants. Oil
and gas produced at the well can contain varying mixtures of many of these
substances, and fluids used during the fracking process can introduce numerous
other chemicals. Researchers have documented 61 hazardous air pollutants
detected near drilling
operations.[[64]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn64) HAP emissions can arise from drilling activities, leaks from
infrastructure, during refining and processing, and from end-use combustion.

Notable air toxics that we touch on in this report include:

  * The **BTEX** chemicals (**benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, and xylene**) are naturally occurring substances found in oil and gas deposits, and are present in gasoline and other refined petroleum products. Benzene in particular is a carcinogen, and exposure to these substances can have both acute and chronic health effects.
  * Many components of oil and gas mixtures are grouped under the term **volatile organic compounds** (VOCs). These can include the BTEX chemicals, formaldehyde, ethane, propane,[[65]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftn65) butane, pentane, hexane, and many others.[[66]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftn66) These VOCs are also a key ingredient in the formation of ground-level ozone. Another related class are termed **polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons** (PAHs), which are also associated with fossil fuels.
  * **Hydrogen sulfide** (H2S) is a highly toxic and dangerous gas that occurs naturally in oil and gas deposits. It has long been recognized as a serious hazard for workers and communities living near oil and gas infrastructure.[[67]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftn67) Oil and gas with high sulfur concentrations are termed “sour” while lower concentrations are called “sweet.”
  * Heavy metals such as **mercury, chromium, cadmium, lead** and others are byproducts of coal and oil combustion. For example, emissions of inorganic mercury from coal plants can be converted into highly toxic methylmercury by aquatic microbes, which can then bioaccumulate in fish and lead to human exposure.

The EPA maintains the **Toxics Release Inventory** (TRI), which tracks many
types of emissions by
facility.[[68]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn68) Using this national dataset, the EPA has also developed a risk
screening tool, the **Risk-Screening Environmental Indicators** (RSEI), which
combines emissions, toxicity, and impacted population into a single toxic
score for each reporting
facility.[[69]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn69) Periodically, the EPA undertakes its **National Air Toxics
Assessment** (NATA), which aims to estimate health risks from air toxics
emissions.[[70]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn70) The EPA also maintains **EJScreen** , a tool to map and assess
EJ indicators.[[71]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn71)

**Types of Studies**

Health effects studies vary significantly by study design, which can provide
different information about a potential health hazard and have different
limitations on what conclusions can be drawn from
them.[[72]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn72) Studies also vary by geographic scale (from individual
facilities to regional to national-scale) and time scale (from single events
to cumulative exposure over years). Different pollutants can be associated
with a range of different health endpoints, from respiratory issues to birth
complications to cancer. Human exposure to a hazard can vary by population
patterns, weather patterns, regulation, enforcement, variation among
facilities,[[73]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn73) and other factors.

**The EPA uses a risk assessment paradigm to synthesize these various types of
scientific information in a manner that can inform policy making.** Key stages
of this process involve hazard identification, assessing dose-response,
assessing exposure, and characterizing the
risk.[[74]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn74)

This chain of causation is most fully developed for some of the widespread
criteria air pollutants — notably, PM2.5 and ozone. Through its scientific
review processes, the EPA has developed full scientific assessments for those
pollutants and used them to set national standards and assess the health
impacts of its rulemakings under the Clean Air
Act.[[75]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn75) The picture is more uncertain for many of the numerous air
toxics of concern. Challenges to a full risk assessment for HAPs include:
uncertainties in emissions inventories and background levels, lack of air
monitoring data, small sample sizes, lack of dose-response data, difficulty
extrapolating to low doses, difficulty in tracking long-term health impacts
(such as cancer), and other
factors.[[76]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn76)

Overlaying demographic patterns to assess disproportionate impact adds yet
more complexity. Studies of disproportionate impact can also vary by
geographic scale, and comparing across states can run up against data
limitations, as well as regional differences in human geography.

Traditional  _distributive justice_ analyses look at patterns of how
environmental risks are distributed among populations, while  _benefits
sharing_ studies analyze how profits or other economic benefits related to
polluting industries are shared among
stakeholders.[[77]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn77)  _Procedural justice_ analyses look at the fairness and
inclusiveness of policy and decision-making. Other studies have looked to
investigate the dynamics of why these patterns exist, to better understand
solutions.[[78]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn78)

Complicating all of this is that **the scientific process itself has become a
target for political interference over recent decades**. Polluting industries
have taken a page from the tobacco industry and have sought to protect their
products and investments from liability, regulation, and public outrage by
“manufacturing doubt” about environmental and health
threats.[[79]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn79) The “capture” of regulatory agencies has also led to
significant political interference in the work of government scientists, who
might otherwise be expected to work in the general public
interest.[[80]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn80) Under the Trump administration, air pollution science at the
EPA became a particular target for political
interference.[[81]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn81) The Biden administration must prioritize both rolling back
harmful policies and rebuilding agencies’ scientific capacity.
---

## 3\. Fossil fuel phaseout

Limiting global warming to the 1.5°C goal to which nations agreed to strive in
the Paris Agreement will require cutting carbon dioxide emissions in half in
the next decade and reaching net-zero GHG emissions globally by
2050.[[82]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn82) For scenarios that do not rely on unproven levels of carbon
capture or carbon removal, these goals will inevitably require rapid
reductions in fossil fuel consumption and
production.[[83]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn83)

Unfortunately, fossil fuel reserves that are already under development contain
enough carbon to push us past the 1.5°C carbon budget and exhaust the 2°C
budget.[[84]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn84) For this and other reasons, **any comprehensive climate policy
platform must focus not just on building out renewable solutions, but also on
policies to phase out fossil fuel
production[[85]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn85) and prevent new investments that lock in future fossil fuel
pollution.[[86]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn86) A “managed decline” of the fossil fuel
industry[[87]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn87) could also facilitate plans and programs to ensure that all
workers and communities are left better off through the transition**.

A mountain of public health research has convincingly linked air pollution
exposure to adverse human health impacts, and has identified air pollution as
among the most significant health burdens, both
globally[[88]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn88),[[89]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-racism/#_ftn89) and in the United
States.[[90]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn90),[[91]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-racism/#_ftn91) Exposure to air pollution has been linked to higher
incidences of heart disease, strokes, asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease, lung cancer, diabetes, and more. Vulnerable populations include the
elderly, children,[[92]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-racism/#_ftn92) and people with underlying health conditions. The most
significant sources of air pollution are the combustion of fossil fuels (and
biomass),[[93]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn93) and as a result, policies to address climate change and phase
out fossil fuels are also shown to have significant health co-benefits due to
reduced air
pollution.[[94]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn94),[[95]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-
racism/#_ftn95),[[96]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-racism/#_ftn96) These co-benefits are both immediate and local, and can
offset climate mitigation
costs.[[97]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn97),[[98]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-
racism/#_ftn98),[[99]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-racism/#_ftn99)

For these reasons, strong policies to limit warming to 1.5°C also hold the
potential to provide immediate local health benefits to communities that have
long battled environmental racism. But these benefits will only be maximized
if policymakers explicitly mitigate air and water pollution, advance
environmental justice, and meaningfully include historically targeted
communities in climate policy-making and implementation.

Environmental justice groups have long voiced skepticism about “carbon-only”
and market-focused climate
policies.[[100]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn100),[[101]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-racism/#_ftn101) Climate policy approaches such as cap-and-trade or
carbon taxes have little evidence of achieving the scale of CO2 emissions
reductions needed on their own, and in some cases market-based carbon
reduction mechanisms have actually increased local CO2 emissions and other
toxic air pollutants in pollution “hotspots” (i.e., localized areas with
elevated pollution levels).” Climate policy-making questions about the scale
of pollution co-benefits (“ _have we maximized public health gains as we
reduce carbon emissions?”_) and their distribution (_“have we reduced long-
standing pollution disparities, or do hotspots remain even as overall
pollution levels decline?”_) are important to address. “Carbon-only”
approaches may miss an opportunity to maximize public health and distributive
justice benefits — or even exacerbate existing pollution impacts and
inequities.

![Ship Channel and Oil Facilities in Texas. © Aaron M. Sprecher /
Greenpeace](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/12/4e3df3ef-gp1suq76.jpg)ExxonMobil Baytown refinery and
petrochemical complex in Baytown, Texas near the Houston Ship Channel. The
Houston area has long been known as a major hub of the petrochemical and
fossil fuel industry. As upstream profits in oil and gas production have
declined, the fossil fuel industry has increasingly invested in petrochemical
divisions as a potential bright spot, citing low price ethane feedstocks
generated from the US fracking boom and increased demand for single-use
plastics in the consumer goods sector. © Aaron M. Sprecher / Greenpeace

One recent study investigated the impact of California’s cap-and-trade system
and found that in the early years of the program, “Neighborhoods that
experienced increases in annual average GHG and co-pollutant emissions from
regulated facilities nearby after trading began had higher proportions of
people of color and poor, less educated, and linguistically isolated
residents, compared to neighborhoods that experienced decreases in
GHGs.”[[102]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn102) There are many open questions about the ultimate effects of
California’s system, but these initial results illustrate some of the risks to
EJ communities.[[103]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-racism/#_ftn103)

Another recent study compared pathways to reduce emissions in the power sector
and found that a “carbon-only” policy risks increasing relative pollution
disparities, and in some cases, absolute pollution levels in EJ
communities.[[104]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn104) This is because under certain conditions, a “carbon-only”
policy favors switching from coal to natural gas-fired power, instead of
driving a build-out of renewables. By contrast, a policy to pair CO2 reduction
goals with air pollution and environmental justice goals can achieve greater
overall pollution co-benefits with only minimal cost increases.

Similarly, climate action plans that rely on offsets, natural gas fuel
switching, or a massive build-out of carbon capture and sequestration (CCS)
infrastructure also run the risk of aggravating local air and water pollution
impacts and propping up a racist, fossil-fuel powered energy system. Even as
CO2 emissions are “offset” or “captured,” these technologies and policies can
allow local CO2 emissions or other pollution to continue, perpetuating harmful
health impacts for communities. The United States currently subsidizes the use
of captured CO2 to extract oil from depleted fields, a process known as
enhanced oil recovery (EOR). Oil companies are now using EOR and offsets to
market “carbon neutral
oil.”[[105]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn105) However, such oil will still contribute to air and water
pollution as it is extracted and burned — with similar health and justice
concerns.

CCS technology captures CO2 but does not capture other air pollutants from
combustion sites, and increased energy requirements of the process itself can
lead to greater overall fuel use and increased emissions for some air
pollutants.[[106]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn106) If no additional air pollution control investments are made,
widespread adoption of CCS could lead to increases in air pollution related
mortality and higher social
costs.[[107]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn107)

California’s reliance on carbon offsets as a component of its cap-and-trade
system has also drawn opposition from EJ advocates, including the recent
resignation of two advisory board members to protest an expansion of the
program.[[108]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn108) Carbon offsets allow in-state facilities to continue emitting
and pay to finance projects that purport to reduce emissions elsewhere. Such
offsets do nothing to reduce local co-pollutants, and have been plagued by
questions about effectiveness and verification of emissions
reductions.[[109]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn109)

Many of the proposed technology-neutral, “carbon-only” plans are explicitly
framed as a way of maintaining fossil fuel
jobs.[[110]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn110) This is a misleading frame and will likely have the
consequence of allowing a dangerous industry to continue polluting for longer,
while delaying and denying justice for polluted communities and fossil fuel
workers themselves. There is no doubt that workers and fossil-fuel dependent
communities will need support during the energy transition. The Green New Deal
has sparked a reorientation of climate policy thinking around a “standards,
investments, and justice” framework that opens space to ensure that both
fossil fuel workers and polluted communities can get
justice.[[111]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn111)

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/6001dec6-gp1stomw_medium_res_with_credit_line-1024x683.jpg)Keep
it the Ground Rally at White House in Washington D.C. Princess Lucaj-Johnson
of Alaska speaks at a Keep It In the Ground Rally.

Fossil fuel corporations have not acted in good faith on climate change nor
air pollution, and their stance has been to maintain their economic position
for as long as possible while deploying messaging tactics that greenwash their
business model. Fossil fuel corporations have known about the scale of the
climate threat for
decades,[[112]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn112) but instead of warning the public, their public
communications tended to downplay climate
risks[[113]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn113) and they spent millions on a campaign to sow doubt and
misinformation.[[114]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-racism/#_ftn114) Just as fossil fuel companies were shown to have known
about the realities of climate change as far back as the 1960s and ‘70s, so
too did they know about the human health impacts of air pollution during that
time. And, as with climate change, the industry responded with denial and
delay in the decades that followed, and sought to block or undermine air
quality
regulations.[[115]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn115)

**In short, “carbon-only” approaches to mitigating climate change that do not
explicitly integrate air and water pollution and environmental justice
considerations could fail to alleviate the public health harms and
disproportionate burdens of fossil fuel production and use — or even
exacerbate them**. Instead, holistic approaches are necessary. One ingredient
of a holistic climate policy approach could be to include rigorous
environmental justice and equity screens in all carbon emission mitigation
measures.

Another, perhaps more direct and effective approach, is to pursue a managed
phaseout of fossil fuels. A fossil fuel phaseout ensures that the transition
away from toxic energy sources is as complete and rapid as possible, neither
delaying the necessary transition nor leaving behind pockets of pollution. A
fossil fuel phaseout also allows policymakers to plan for the transition needs
of workers and communities, rather than leaving it up to unpredictable,
market-driven forces.

The next four sections detail the public health harms and disproportionate
impacts of fossil fuels at each stage of their supply chain.

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/12/17b1a3b8-screen-shot-2021-04-12-at-2.02.07-pm-863x1024.png)

## 4\. Extraction

Harm to people and the environment from fossil fuels begins with extraction.
Oil and gas deposits contain toxic chemicals, and the processes of drilling,
development, and production can lead to human exposure to both hazardous and
criteria air pollutants. Coal mining, too, is associated with significant
health risks for both workers and nearby communities.

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/ac932215-gp0stoy76_medium_res_with_credit_line-1024x683.jpg)Shale
Fracking in Texas. Gas flares near a wind-powered water pump at a
hydrofracking installation in Karnes County.

### Oil and gas extraction

Over the past decade, the shale boom has brought increased scrutiny on oil and
gas production in the United States, with a particular focus on air and water
pollution related to hydraulic fracturing (“fracking”) and other drilling
techniques. Although fracking itself is only a specific part of the drilling
process for certain wells, the term has become a synecdoche for the entire
industry and its negative consequences for health and the environment.

Nationally, 17.6 million people live within one mile of at least one active
oil and gas well.[[116]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-racism/#_ftn116) Shale now accounts for 65% of oil production and 78% of
gas production in the United States, although a significant portion of U.S.
production still comes from conventional
wells.[[117]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn117) Tar sands extraction in Alberta has also been a big topic in
the United States due to the build-out of pipelines to transport oil south to
the Gulf Coast. Many of the health risks discussed below are applicable to
conventional and unconventional production because exposure can occur not just
at the wellhead or due to a particular well-stimulation event, but at other
times and locations as well.

#### Public health harm

A large volume of studies have investigated the impacts of unconventional oil
and gas extraction. Groups such as PSE Healthy
Energy,[[118]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn118),[[119]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-racism/#_ftn119) Concerned Health Professionals of New York (CHPNY) and
Physicians for Social Responsibility
(PSR),[[120]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn120) and other
researchers[[121]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn121),[[122]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-
racism/#_ftn122),[[123]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-racism/#_ftn123) have published comprehensive reviews of the literature.
In this section, we focus primarily on the air pollution risks of
fracking,[[124]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn124) but studies have also detailed risks from water pollution
(due to spills, waste discharge, and underground migration of chemicals),
earthquakes, naturally occurring radioactive substances, lost ecosystem
services,[[125]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn125) noise pollution, and a variety of economic
impacts.[[126]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn126)

Natural gas is primarily composed of methane (CH4), which is a greenhouse gas
with a warming potential 84-87 times greater than CO2 over a twenty-year
timeframe.[[127]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn127) One key axis of the fracking debate, which we don’t discuss
here, has revolved around the climate impacts of methane emissions (either
vented or fugitive) and the size of any climate “benefit” relative to
coal.[[128]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn128) However, methane is also a potential ozone precursor and can
therefore play a role in increasing ozone concentration in regions with high
levels of drilling.[[129]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-
racism/#_ftn129),[[130]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-racism/#_ftn130)

In addition to methane, over 60 hazardous air pollutants have been detected
near oil and gas extraction
sites,[[131]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn131) including carcinogens, volatile organic compounds (VOCs),
endocrine disrupting
chemicals,[[132]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn132) and more. VOC emissions from fracking can lead to ground-
level ozone formation and contribute to regional air pollution. In addition to
direct emissions, widespread gas flaring in drilling
regions[[133]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn133) and the presence of related infrastructure, such as
compressor stations and increased truck traffic, can lead to particulate
matter and NOx
pollution.[[134]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn134) Monitoring studies near drilling sites have begun to estimate
human exposure levels to various pollutants as a function of distance,
although they note that exposure can vary significantly over
time.[[135]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn135),[[136]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-
racism/#_ftn136),[[137]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-racism/#_ftn137)

Three oil and gas basins — the Permian (located in Texas and New Mexico),
Eagle Ford (Texas), and Bakken (North Dakota and Montana) — account for 83% of
gas flaring activity in the United States. Half a million people living in
those basins reside within three miles (five kilometers) of a flare, with 39%
living close to more than 100
flares.[[138]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#=)

A forthcoming study quantified the health impact of oil and gas production due
to criteria pollutants alone, and found that in 2016 the sector’s emissions
resulted in 7,500 excess deaths, along with other health
impacts.[[139]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn139) A variety of studies have associated proximity to oil and gas
activity with health problems such as respiratory impacts (_e.g._ , asthma),
cancer, poor birth outcomes, cardiovascular impacts, sleep disturbance, and
mental health issues. Although not a comprehensive review, the following
paragraphs provide a selection of recent health findings.

An emerging body of evidence associates close proximity to oil and gas
activity with elevated cancer risk, although researchers note further study is
warranted.[[140]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn140),[[141]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-
racism/#_ftn141),[[142]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-racism/#_ftn142) Most notably, **a study in Colorado’s oil and gas region
used _in situ_ monitoring of benzene and other HAPs and found that within 500
feet of oil and gas well sites, cancer risk was eight times higher than EPA’s
level of concern.**[[143]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-racism/#_ftn143) This and earlier studies found that both cancer and non-
cancer health risks were greatest within one-half mile of wells, with benzene
exposure being the largest risk
factor.[[144]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn144)

In recent years, studies have strengthened the association between oil and gas
development and adverse birth outcomes. A study in California’s San Joaquin
Valley found that “exposure to oil and gas well sites is associated with
increased risk of spontaneous preterm
birth.”[[145]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn145) Another California-based study found proximity to higher oil
and gas development ”was associated with adverse birth outcomes among mothers
residing in rural
areas.”[[146]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn146) A study set in the Eagle Ford region of Texas found evidence
that exposure to flaring is “associated with an increased risk of preterm
birth.”[[147]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn147) Other studies have found similar results in
Colorado,[[148]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn148)
Pennsylvania,[[149]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn149) and
Oklahoma.[[150]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn150)

Oil and gas development is a source of ozone precursors (notably VOCs and NOx)
and has been associated with elevated regional ozone
levels.[[151]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn151),[[152]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-racism/#_ftn152) Elevated ozone levels are in turn associated with asthma
exacerbation.[[153]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn153) Some recent studies have observed associations between oil
and gas activity and asthma diagnoses, emergency room visits, and
hospitalizations.[[154]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-
racism/#_ftn154),[[155]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-
racism/#_ftn155),[[156]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-racism/#_ftn156) Studies have also found associations between oil and gas
activity and cardiovascular
disease.[[157]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn157),[[158]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-racism/#_ftn158)

A recent study in Oklahoma found that an increase in the number of oil and gas
wells are associated with increases in “mortality rates, and incidences of
cancer, cardiac, and respiratory diseases in communities in close spatial
proximity” and decreases in life
expectancy.[[159]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn159) The authors of the most recent CHPNY and PSR compendium of
scientific studies concluded,**“Our examination uncovered no evidence that
fracking can be practiced in a manner that does _not_ threaten human health
directly and without imperiling climate stability upon which public health
depends.”[[160]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn160)**

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/12d96471-gp0bnk_web_size_with_credit_line.jpg)Boy with
Respiratory Problems in Louisiana. Gregory Jackson Jr. wearing a breathing
mask and standing in front of his home in Norco. Gregory has had respiratory
problems since birth. In the background, a hand-painted sign that reads: “Move
us Away”.

#### Disproportionate impact

Unlike industrial facilities, which are sited according to economic,
political, and social factors, oil and gas extraction takes place in areas
with specific geologic characteristics, although other factors can play a role
in how extraction occurs. These drilling areas can vary widely in their
demographics and environmental justice impacts, but emerging evidence shows
that in general, “pregnant women, children, communities of color, Indigenous
people, and impoverished communities are disproportionately harmed by
fracking.”[[161]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn161)

Studies of the distributive environmental justice of fracking show that
impacted populations can vary by
geography.[[162]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn162)[[163]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-racism/#_ftn163) In south Texas, there is evidence that fracking
wastewater disposal wells are disproportionately located in Black, Brown,
Indigenous, and poor
communities.[[164]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn164),[[165]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-racism/#_ftn165) Similarly, south Texas oil and gas flaring is found to
disproportionately occur in Hispanic
communities,[[166]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn166) and the risk of birth complications is higher among Hispanic
women.[[167]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn167) Flaring in the Bakken is found to disproportionately impact
the Fort Berthold Indian Reservation in particular, while in the Permian and
Eagle Ford basins, a majority of the population living near flaring are people
of color.[[168]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn168)

On the other hand, studies of the location of fracking wells in the Marcellus
shale region of Pennsylvania, Ohio, and West Virginia found more mixed
evidence on distributive environmental justice metrics. One study found no
evidence of racial or income
disparities,[[169]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn169) while another found evidence for income disparities only in
Pennsylvania.[[170]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn170) Notably, the region is largely white with relatively high
poverty levels.

In California, people living close to oil and gas wells are disproportionately
from low-income households with non-white and Latinx
demographics.[[171]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn171),[[172]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-racism/#_ftn172) Concerns about drilling and vulnerable populations are
found in both rural Kern
County[[173]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn173) and urban Los
Angeles.[[174]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn174) Notably, the history of redlining and oil drilling in Los
Angeles stretches back to the earliest days of the oil industry. In the 1930s,
the location of oil development and resources were factors used in defining
redlined areas.[[175]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-racism/#_ftn175)

A more recent study combining data from four states found “robust evidence
that minorities, especially African Americans, disproportionately live near
fracking wells, but less consistent evidence for environmental injustice by
income or educational
attainment.”[[176]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn176) The study noted significant variation from state to state,
including disparities impacting Black/African-American people in Oklahoma and
Texas, and Hispanic people in Texas and urban Colorado, but no racial
disparities in Pennsylvania.

Other studies have analyzed the problem from benefit sharing and procedural
justice perspectives. One study of Denton, Texas, found that the town’s
residents (who must deal with pollution risks from drilling) only own 1% of
the total mineral wealth value, and the largest share of the town’s mineral
rights owners live outside of Texas. Denton residents receive some indirect
benefits from extraction through taxes and other revenue that is collected by
the city.[[177]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn177) Another study looked at property values near oil and gas
wells in Colorado and described complex dynamics in how populations respond to
oil and gas development. The authors observed “economic, rural, participatory,
and/or distributive injustices that could contribute to health risk
vulnerabilities in populations near O&G [oil and gas]
wells.”[[178]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn178)

Indigenous communities have long faced high levels of violence, which are
being further exacerbated by extractive industries. In recent years, the
United States and Canada have seen an epidemic of murdered and missing
Indigenous women (MMIW) at a rate “10 times higher than other ethnicities,”
and which represents the third-leading cause of death for Indigenous women in
the United States.[[179]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-racism/#_ftn179) Indigenous communities have identified industrial camps,
sometimes called “man-camps,” associated with large resource development
projects (such as pipelines) as a contributor to
violence.[[180]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn180) A recent U.S.-based study analyzed 23 MMIW “hotspots” and
found fracking operations as a “likely contributing factor” in many of
them.[[181]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn181)

### Coal mining

#### Public health harm

Coal mining in the United States has changed dramatically in recent decades,
even as the industry is in structural decline. Industry focus has shifted from
Appalachia to Western states, and from underground mining to surface mining
(including mountaintop removal mining, or MTR). Coal mining has long generated
significant health and safety risks for its workers, and for nearby coal
communities. Strong transition policies will be needed to ensure all impacted
workers and communities are made better during the transition away from coal.

Coal mining has long been a dangerous profession, and tragic accidents still
occur from gas leaks, explosions, cave-ins, and more. Since 1900, over 100,000
miners have been killed in the United States. Black lung disease
(pneumoconiosis) has also made a return among Appalachian coal
miners.[[182]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn182) Mine safety regulations seemed to put the disease on a path
to eradication in the 1990s, but the trend reversed after 2000 and now as many
as one in five miners in Central Appalachia shows evidence of black
lung.[[183]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn183)

Mining creates significant health risks for local communities as well. MTR
mining radically alters the landscape, removing mountain ridges and
vegetation, and filling valleys with mining “spoil.” This process can increase
the risks of mudslides and floods, contaminate drinking water, and increase
air and noise pollution. Impoundments of coal slurry also create local health
hazards due to improper storage, and can lead to significant spills.

A series of health studies in Appalachia found associations between mining
intensity and mortality, lung cancer, poor birth outcomes, and other diseases.
The excess mortality rate in the region was estimated to be over 2,300 deaths
every year.[[184]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn184)

#### Disproportionate impact

The Appalachian coal-mining region is majority white (although with a long
Black/African-American
heritage[[185]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn185)), and has long seen elevated poverty levels and a high
proportion of economically distressed
counties.[[186]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn186) Some studies have found that MTR regions have “significantly
higher mortality rates, total poverty rates, and child poverty rates” compared
to other comparable
counties.[[187]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn187) Other studies have noted that the impact of coal employment
on poverty and well-being has been mixed and has changed over
time.[[188]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn188)

The largest coal-producing region in the United States is now the Powder River
Basin in Montana and Wyoming, where 16 mines produce 43% of U.S.
coal.[[189]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn189) The region is sparsely populated, and the population is
roughly 85% White and 11% Native
American.[[190]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn190) The Basin overlaps with both the Crow Reservation and the
Northern Cheyenne Reservation. Decisions in the 1970s to open up the region to
coal production led the Crow and Northern Cheyenne Nations to revolt against
federal management of Tribal resources and demand greater control over
development of their energy
resources.[[191]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn191) Since that time, the Crow and the Northern Cheyenne Nations
have pursued different strategies to manage energy extraction on their
lands.[[192]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn192)

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/32727d63-gp03vuz_medium_res_with_credit_line-1024x683.jpg)Mountain
Top Removal in West Virginia. Aerial photograph documenting mountain top
removal mining atop Cherry Pond Mountain.

## 5\. Processing and transport

Oil, gas, and coal extraction occurs in specific, although widespread,
geographic areas. Extensive networks of pipelines, terminals, storage
facilities, tankers, trains, and trucks are needed to transport fuels either
to their end markets, or to processing hubs where they are transformed into
commercial products. Risks of human exposure to hazardous or criteria air
pollutants can occur all along these networks, but certain regions have
particularly high concentrations of emitters.

### Oil refining, natural gas processing, and petrochemical manufacturing

After extraction, crude oil is processed in oil refineries to create a variety
of petroleum products, including gasoline, diesel, jet fuel, heavy fuel oil,
and others. Natural gas from the wellhead is processed to separate out dry gas
(used for power and heating) from natural gas liquids (NGLs), which are common
inputs in petrochemical manufacturing, including plastics production.

#### Public health harm

Refineries, natural gas processing, and petrochemical facilities are
associated with both criteria and hazardous air emissions, which impose health
risks on nearby
communities.[[193]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn193),[[194]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-racism/#_ftn194) The Toxic Release Inventory (TRI) tracks the emissions
of toxic air and water releases from some of these facilities, although not
all industries are covered. Because TRI tracks such a wide diversity of toxic
emissions, the EPA has developed Risk-Screening Environmental Indicators
(RSEI) to synthesize TRI data into simpler indicators of the overall toxic
burden from a facility. RSEI data combines overall emissions with the toxicity
of each pollutant and the size of the exposed
population.[[195]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn195)

A 2009 study using RSEI data found that the petroleum refining sector was the
9th most polluting economic sector among industries reporting to
TRI.[[196]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn196),[[197]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-racism/#_ftn197) **New** **Greenpeace analysis of the 2018 RSEI data
shows that petroleum refineries and petrochemical manufacturing remain the #8
and #9 most polluting industries** , representing 2.7% and 2.6%, respectively,
of the total national toxic burden reported to
TRI.[[198]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn198) The only sectors with greater toxic risks are certain types
of chemical and metal manufacturing. **One recent study noted that 6.1 million
Americans live within three miles of a
refinery.[[199]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn199)**

A number of studies have investigated health impacts associated with specific
refineries or petrochemical
facilities,[[200]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn200),[[201]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-
racism/#_ftn201),[[202]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-racism/#_ftn202) although individuals sites will naturally vary with
respect to local populations, pollutants, emissions levels, regulation,
enforcement, etc. Meta-analyses have also uncovered evidence associating
refineries and petrochemical facilities with both
cancer[[203]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn203),[[204]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-racism/#_ftn204) and non-cancer health
risks.[[205]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn205),[[206]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-racism/#_ftn206) **One notable study is a “natural experiment” regarding
a refinery closure in Oakville, Ontario, which found that a reduction in SO 2
emissions led to measurable improvements in local
health.[[207]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn207)**

Other studies have looked at the impact of higher emissions levels resulting
from breakdowns, accidents, explosions, spills, and other operational
failures.[[208]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn208),[[209]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-racism/#_ftn209) Studies of residents exposed to benzene following a
prolonged flaring disaster at a BP refinery in Texas City, Texas, showed a
range of adverse health symptoms and indications of risks of “serious future
health
complications.”[[210]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-
racism/#_ftn210),[[211]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-racism/#_ftn211) Another detailed the surge of emergency room visits from
nearby neighborhoods following chemical releases in 2007 and 2012 at Chevron’s
refinery in Richmond,
California.[[212]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn212)

BP’s Texas City refinery was also the site of a massive 2005 explosion that
killed 15 refinery workers and injured 180 people. Although comprehensive data
on refinery accidents is hard to find, a 2015 investigative piece found that
at least 58 workers had died in the decade after the BP explosion, only
slightly fewer than in the decade
prior.[[213]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn213) Both the Texas City and Richmond refineries release toxic
pollution that disproportionately burdens Black, Brown, Indigenous, and poor
communities.

One hazard associated with refineries that has received recent scrutiny is the
use of hydrofluoric acid (HF) alkylation to increase the octane of gasoline.
HF is a highly toxic chemical that can form an aerosol cloud and potentially
travel for miles when released. In 2013, the United Steelworkers and the Tony
Mazzochi Center conducted a survey of workers at refineries that use HF and
found “131 HF-related incidents or near misses” over three years, and raised
concerns about ineffective safety
systems.[[214]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn214) A 2015 explosion at ExxonMobil’s Torrance, California
refinery reportedly just narrowly missed causing an HF
disaster.[[215]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn215)

Another chemical that has prompted local concern is hydrogen cyanide (HCN), a
refinery byproduct that has also been used as a chemical weapon. Houston,
Texas, activists have mobilized to stop Valero’s refinery from receiving a
permit for HCN
emissions.[[216]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn216) A review of EPA monitoring data by the Environmental
Integrity Project (EIP) found that in 2019, 10 refineries were releasing
“cancer-causing benzene into nearby communities at concentrations above
federal action
levels.”[[217]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn217) Despite this, a recent investigation found that EPA air
pollution monitors routinely miss “major toxic releases and day-to-day
pollution dangers” — notably including a massive explosion at the Philadelphia
Energy Solutions refinery in
2019.[[218]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn218)

A 2017 report by the NAACP and the Clean Air Task Force (CATF) provided case
studies of health impacts on several communities living near oil refineries,
but did not attempt to quantify overall health
impacts.[[219]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn219) A recent expert evaluation concluded, “there is ample
evidence of the health hazards of refineries during catastrophic failures and
sufficient evidence of the health risks of air pollution from refineries
during times of normal
operation.”[[220]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn220)

A series of reports from CATF analyzed the natural gas supply chain, looking
at air toxics,[[221]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn221) ozone
formation,[[222]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn222) and state-level
risks.[[223]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn223) Making use of the EPA’s National Air Toxics Analysis (NATA),
the studies concluded that **238 counties in 21
states[[224]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn224) with a total population of nine million “face cancer risk
above EPA’s one-in-a-million level of concern due to toxic emissions from oil
and gas operations**.**”** These reports focus on the entire natural gas
supply chain, including drilling sites (see previous section), but exclude oil
infrastructure such as refineries.

#### Disproportionate impact

Studies have found that oil and natural gas facilities are disproportionately
sited in vulnerable communities and lead to health disparities. Much of this
analysis is focused on the Gulf South region, where much of the nation’s oil,
gas, and petrochemical infrastructure is located.

Studies of nationwide and cross-industry RSEI data have concluded that
reporting industries generally have higher risks for Black, Brown, Indigenous,
and poor
communities.[[225]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn225) Researchers at the Political Economy Research Institute
(PERI) have used finer grained geographic microdata (RSEI-GM) to estimate the
percentage of each facility’s toxic score that is borne by
minority[[226]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn226) and poor populations. PERI then combines facilities under the
same parent company and publishes annual Top 100 Polluter
Indexes.[[227]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn227)

Greenpeace analysis of 2018 PERI data shows that TRI-reporting facilities
overall — and most of the top-polluting sectors individually — impose a
disproportionate toxic burden on minorities and poor
people.[[228]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn228)

In particular, petroleum refineries and petrochemical manufacturing are among
the sectors which impose the most disproportionate toxic burden on minorities
and poor people. The 2009 PERI study found that **the petroleum refining
sector was the 2nd worst industrial sector in terms of both minority and poor
shares of its aggregate toxic
score**.[[229]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn229) Greenpeace analysis using PERI’s 2018 data shows that 56% of
refinery toxic burden is borne by minorities (who make up 39% of the
population) and 19% by poor people (who make up 14% of the population). Among
the top 10 worst polluting sectors in the 2018 TRI data, the petroleum sector
is 2nd worst for minority share, and 4th worst for poor share. In the
petrochemical sector, 66% of the toxic burden is borne by minorities and 18%
by poor people.

_Figure 2_ shows 133 U.S. refineries (left) and 48 petrochemical facilities
(right) and the share of their pollution burden carried by minorities (x-axis)
and poor people (y-axis).

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-stateless/2024/12/bfc4a7cc-
fossil-fuel-racism-figure-2-1-2048x1377-1-1024x689.png)

In particular, it is notable that a majority of toxic burden for both
refineries and petrochemicals is in regions that are  _both_ less-white and
lower-income than average (upper right quadrant). This means that the most
polluting facilities in these sectors are located in some of the most
vulnerable communities, and in many cases have been located in these regions
for decades. Table 1 shows that oil and gas corporations are well-represented
in PERI’s latest Top 100 Air Polluters list, and that their operations
generally disproportionately impact minorities and poor people.

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/12/2bb32b54-fossil-fuel-racism-
table-1-2048x1334-1-1024x667.png)

The NAACP/CATF report also concluded that the majority of U.S. refineries “are
sited in low-income areas and communities of color” and, in particular,
quantified significant health impacts imposed on Black/African-American
communities from natural gas
infrastructure.[[231]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-racism/#_ftn231) In particular, emissions attributed to natural gas
infrastructure led to elevated cancer risk impacting one million
Black/African-Americans, as well as 138,000 asthma attacks and 101,000 lost
school days for Black/African-American children.

A 2016 study by the Union of Concerned Scientists and Texas Environmental
Justice Advocacy Services (t.e.j.a.s.) compared health risks from chronic and
acute exposure among four communities in Houston, Texas: “two predominantly
Hispanic and low socio-economic east Houston communities […] with two
primarily white and wealthier west Houston communities.” The study “found
large disparities between the east and west Houston communities in terms of
overall toxicity levels from chemical exposures,” with oil refineries and
chemical manufacturing ranking among the top polluting sources in the east
Houston areas.[[232]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn232)

The petrochemical industry continues to expand along the Gulf Coast and
elsewhere, partly driven by plastics production, which is widely seen as a
lifeline for oil and gas companies in a time of increasing ambition on
climate.[[233]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn233) In 2020, Formosa Plastics (currently #63 on PERI’s list)
received permits to construct a massive petrochemical complex in the “Cancer
Alley” region of Louisiana. Local Black environmental justice leaders opposing
the complex, including RISE Saint James, assert that Formosa’s permits would
double air toxics emissions (including benzene and ethylene oxide) in the
region,[[234]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn234) which is already home to census tracts with some of the
highest cancer risks in the United
States.[[235]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn235)

A recent study of the U.S. refinery industry found that refinery capacity is
correlated with higher benzene emissions, and such emissions are associated
with lower county per-capita
income.[[236]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn236) However, an earlier study of enforcement penalties levied
against oil refineries found “mixed evidence” of inequality in
enforcement.[[237]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn237)

Other studies have looked at disparities in exposure to air toxics, without
reference to the source. A 2012 study using the 2005 NATA found**significant
cancer risk disparities in “Cancer Alley,” with poor areas experiencing 16%
more cumulative risk and 12% more risk for areas that are greater than 75%
Black/African-
American**.[[238]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn238) A 2018 study found that nationally, public schools with the
highest risk for exposure to air neurotoxicants were “significantly more
likely to be eligible for free/reduced price meals, and to be Hispanic,
[B]lack, or Asian/Pacific Islander
(API).”[[239]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn239)

![Ship Channel and Oil Facilities in Texas. © Aaron M. Sprecher /
Greenpeace](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/12/f531114f-gp1suq87.jpg)Ineos and Braskem oil facilities in La
Porte, Texas. The Houston area has long been known as a major hub of the
petrochemical and fossil fuel industry. As upstream profits in oil and gas
production have declined, the fossil fuel industry has increasingly invested
in petrochemical divisions as a potential bright spot, citing low price ethane
feedstocks generated from the US fracking boom and increased demand for
single-use plastics in the consumer goods sector. © Aaron M. Sprecher /
Greenpeace

### Pipelines and terminals

The network of pipelines is regulated by the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials
Safety Administration (PHMSA), which differentiates between crude oil, refined
petroleum products, highly volatile liquids (often NGLs), and natural gas.
Gathering pipelines, which are smaller and less regulated, take oil and gas
from the wellhead to a separation facility and then to the larger transmission
pipeline, which transports the separated product to a refinery or other
destination. At various places along the network are found tank farms, bulk
storage facilities, terminals, and other locations where oil and gas is
stored, loaded, unloaded, bought, sold, and
traded.[[240]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn240)

#### Public health harm

Similar to processing facilities, fossil fuel transportation infrastructure is
also prone to leaks, spills, explosions, and other disasters.

There is no safe way to transport oil and
gas.[[241]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn241) The oil and gas pipeline network experiences a steady
drumbeat of small- to medium-sized spills and leaks every year, as well as
occasional catastrophic spills such as the 20,000 barrel tar sands spilled
into the Kalamazoo River in 2010. Stronger regulations have led to meaningful
declines in spills from oil
tankers,[[242]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn242) but risks of another  _Exxon Valdez_ -like spill still
remain. Transporting oil or gas by truck or train also brings significant
safety risks, as illustrated by a 2013 derailment and explosion in Lac-
Mégantic, Quebec that killed 47
people.[[243]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn243) Transporting coal can lead to coal dust
pollution.[[244]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn244)

#### Disproportionate impact

With the shale boom, the United States has seen a rapid build-out of oil and
gas pipelines, as well as liquified natural gas (LNG) and crude export
terminals. The vast majority of this infrastructure build-out is funneling oil
and gas from places like the Bakken, Niobrara (located primarily in Colorado
and Wyoming), and Permian regions south to the Gulf Coast, where it is
processed or (increasingly) exported. This new terminal and pipeline build-out
has the effect of converging significant volumes of oil and gas into regions
that are already experiencing environmental justice burdens. These include
Corpus Christi, the Houston Shipping
Channel,[[245]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn245) Beaumont, Port Arthur, the “Cancer Alley” region of
Louisiana, and other Gulf South communities.

Greenpeace analysis of the 2018 RSEI data finds that the more than 400
Petroleum Bulk Stations and Terminals reporting to TRI are much smaller
emitters than refineries or petrochemical plants, but are similarly
disproportionately located in poor (19% of toxic score) and minority
communities (71% of toxic
score).[[246]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn246)

Pipeline construction has become a particular environmental justice flashpoint
in recent years. The construction of the Dakota Access pipeline in 2016 led to
massive resistance by Water Protectors at Standing Rock. One issue in that
controversy was the apparent rerouting of the pipeline away from a majority
White community in favor of a route that put Tribal water resources at
risk.[[247]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn247)

Other major pipeline projects — including the now-canceled Keystone XL, the
Transmountain Expansion, and the Line 3 Expansion — have also attracted strong
opposition from Indigenous and First Nations activists, as well as from other
communities along the routes. A 2018 study found evidence that
disproportionately large numbers of Black/African-American, Hispanic, and
Indigenous residents live within one mile of the proposed Atlantic Coast
Pipeline (ACP) route in North
Carolina.[[248]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn248) The ACP project was canceled in 2020.

The routing of pipelines from extraction regions to processing or export
locations is subject to different pressures and processes than the siting of
point source facilities like refineries. In particular, the origin and
destination of a pipeline are usually fixed by geography and existing
infrastructure. While there are choices that are made about the intervening
route, many pipelines are routed through low-population density rural areas
for much of their length. Pipeline build-out often facilitates an expansion of
oil and gas drilling and processing, and can lock in dependence on oil and
gas.

However, a 2021 study looking at 84 new, proposed natural gas pipelines found
only limited support for the hypothesis that the proposed routes
disproportionately impacted environmental justice communities. The authors
noted the importance of further research to see if this remains the case for
completed
pipelines.[[249]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn249)

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/776f15b3-gp0stpzq2_web_size.jpg)Gas Pipeline Warning Sign in
Colorado. A gas pipeline warning sign at the edge of a cornfield near a
hydraulic fracturing drilling rig creating a new well on the Niobara shale
formation, one of the most intensively fracked areas in the United States.

## 6\. Combustion

The end use of most (but not all) fossil fuels is combustion for energy, which
can occur in both stationary sources (_e.g._ , power plants and industrial
facilities) and mobile sources (_e.g._ , cars and trucks). As discussed above,
criteria air pollution from the combustion of fossil fuels is one of the most
significant global health burdens, and is linked to millions of premature
deaths every year globally.

### General exposure to criteria air pollution

#### Public health harm

A 2020 study by Greenpeace Southeast Asia and the Centre for Research on
Energy and Clean Air (CREA) estimated that in 2018, 4.5 million premature
deaths worldwide could be attributed to PM2.5, ozone, and NOx air pollution
from burning fossil fuels. It was estimated that health impacts arising from
these pollutants cost roughly US$8 billion per day, or 3.3% of the world’s
GDP.[[250]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn250) (In calculating economic costs of air pollution, researchers
often include the economic value of lost years of life, lost days of work, and
healthcare costs.) In the United States alone, the report found that air
pollution due to fossil fuel combustion causes 230,000 premature deaths each
year, with an economic cost of US$600 billion.

A 2021 study found even higher numbers: 8.7 million premature deaths globally
in 2018 due to PM2.5 from fossil fuels, and 355,000 premature deaths in the
United States.[[251]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn251) The elevated numbers were the result of new information on
the concentration-response function of PM2.5, which relates the size of health
effects to the level of PM2.5 in the environment to which humans are exposed.

A small portion of the carbon associated with fossil fuels ends up stored in
commercial products (_e.g._ , plastics, lubricants, asphalt) instead of being
combusted as fuel. Some of those products (notably plastics) are later
incinerated at the end of their commercial life, which can lead to both carbon
emissions and air pollution. Plastic incineration can result in emissions of
dioxin and other air
toxics.[[252]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn252)

#### Disproportionate impact

In the context of the United States, studies have shown that exposure to air
pollution is not shared equally. A 2018 study found that for PM2.5, “**those
in poverty had 1.35 times higher burden than did the overall population, and
non-Whites had 1.28 times higher burden.” The burden for Black/African-
Americans was even higher at
1.54.**[[253]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn253) Similarly, a 2019 study looked at both PM2.5 exposure and
consumption patterns that lead to air pollution, and again concluded that
“Blacks and Hispanics on average bear a ‘pollution burden’ of 56% and 63%
excess exposure, respectively, relative to the exposure caused by their
consumption.”[[254]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn254) Ozone pollution is also found to have a disproportionate
impact on Black, Brown, Indigenous, and poor
communities.[[255]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn255)

Over the last several decades, clean air regulation in the United States has
significantly reduced pollution
levels,[[256]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn256) although from 2016 to 2018 pollution levels partially
rebounded.[[257]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn257) However, a 2020 study found that **PM 2.5  _disparities_ have
persisted even as overall levels have declined** —  _i.e._ , “the most
polluted census tracts in 1981 remained the most polluted in
2016.”[[258]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn258)

People of color are also more likely to live in areas that violate air quality
standards. For example, a 2011 study found non-Hispanic Black/African-American
people are “consistently overrepresented in communities with the poorest air
quality,”[[259]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn259) and nearly 50% of Hispanic-Americans live in areas that
frequently violate ozone
standards.[[260]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn260)

These broad, nation-wide studies give high-level statistical evidence that
Black, Brown, Indigenous, and poor communities suffer disproportionately from
fossil fuel combustion. Other studies have looked more closely at particular
sources, including coal and natural gas power plants, as well as emissions
from transportation.

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/d5f7eb13-gp0sto7lj_medium_res_with_credit_line-1024x642.jpg)Duke
Energy Ash Spill Protest in North Carolina. Protesters outside Duke Energy
display the variety of dangerous toxic chemicals leaking into the Dan River
from an unlined coal ash containment pond at a retired Duke coal plant. The
group was demanding Duke clean up its toxic waste. Tens of thousands of tons
of toxic coal ash continue to spill into the Dan River, which provides
drinking water for people in Danville, Virginia and beyond.

### Coal and natural gas power plants

Coal- and natural gas-fired power plants are among the largest sources of air
pollution, both globally and in the United States.

Although not a main focus of this report, other types of industrial facilities
use fossil fuels for on-site energy generation and industrial processes that
require high heat — in particular, iron and steel production and various types
of manufacturing. Both criteria and air toxics emissions from these industrial
sites can be significant, and bring health risks for local
communities.[[261]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn261) Decarbonization strategies for industrial sector emissions
must also focus on eliminating criteria and hazardous pollutant emissions and
alleviating environmental justice
concerns.[[262]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn262)

#### Public health harm

Numerous studies have linked coal combustion to significant human health,
economic, and environmental
harms.[[263]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn263),[[264]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-racism/#_ftn264) One study found that the full lifecycle costs of coal to
the U.S. public was between $175 and $523 billion every year, with a
significant portion of that total ($65 to $187 billion) from monetized health
impacts from coal combustion in power
plants.[[265]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn265) As described above, these health impacts are primarily due to
exposure to criteria air pollutants PM2.5, NOx, and SO2, but coal plants are
also a significant source of mercury as well as various hazardous and
carcinogenic air
pollutants.[[266]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn266) Coal plants also generate coal ash as a waste product, which
can be harmful as it is often improperly stored and can lead to disasters such
as the 2008 Kingston coal ash
spill.[[267]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn267)

In 2015, the Obama administration finalized its Clean Power Plan (CPP) to
reduce CO2 emissions from the nation’s fleet of power plants. EPA analysis of
the rule projected it would lead to a 32% decline in CO2 emissions and a 22%
decline in coal generation by
2030.[[268]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn268) These reductions would come with co-beneficial reductions in
PM2.5 and ozone levels that would avoid 1,500 to 3,600 premature deaths and
90,000 childhood asthma attacks in the year
2030.[[269]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn269) In 2019, the Trump administration finalized a significantly
weaker rule replacing the CPP. The Trump administration’s rule, which would
have led to as many as 1,400 additional deaths per year compared to the CPP,
was struck down by a federal appeals court in January
2021.[[270]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn270)

Recent studies have measured the health benefits of phasing out fossil fuel
power plants. By taking advantage of a “natural experiment” when eight coal
and oil power plants were retired in California, researchers were able to
measure improvements in the health of nearby populations. The study found
plant retirement was associated with a “decrease in the proportion of preterm
birth” for mothers living within six miles (10
kilometers).[[271]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn271) A similar study found improved asthma outcomes following the
conversion and retrofitting of coal plants in
Kentucky.[[272]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn272)

Another study analyzed the impacts of closing coal plants in Texas and
concluded that “air pollution health impacts often exceed the value of the
electricity generated and are of similar magnitude to climate
impacts.”[[273]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn273) In the U.S. Northeast, the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative
(RGGI) — a carbon market designed to reduce power sector emissions — was also
found to reduce NOx and SO2 emissions, and related regional PM2.5
concentrations. These reductions were estimated to bring “substantial child
health benefits,” including avoided asthma cases and avoided preterm births.
The study did not attempt to investigate disparities in health impacts by race
or income.[[274]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn274)

Natural gas-fired power plants do not directly generate as much particulate,
mercury, or SO2 pollution, although they do generate NOx emissions, which can
lead to ozone and PM2.5 via secondary processes. What’s more, natural gas
power plants are more likely than coal to be located in denser areas, thereby
increasing exposure to
pollution.[[275]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn275) So, while natural gas power generation can have lower health
impacts than coal, it is not “clean” in comparison to renewable power
sources.[[276]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn276)

#### Disproportionate impact

A 2012 study led by the NAACP found that “coal power plants tend to be
disproportionately located in low-income communities and communities of
color.”[[277]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn277) The study found that **the six million people who lived
within three miles of a coal plant had a lower average income ($18,400) and
were more likely to be people of color (39%)** than the population at large
($21,587 and 36%, respectively). The report also gave 75 coal plants a failing
grade on environmental justice due to their outsized pollution impacts and
disproportionate siting in Black, Brown, Indigenous, and poor communities.

Subsequent government studies have confirmed this finding. A 2015 EPA analysis
carried out in support of the Clean Power Plan found “a higher percentage of
minority and low-income communities living near power plants than national
averages,” although the analysis noted wide variability in impacted
populations.[[278]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn278) A 2017 study by Oak Ridge National Laboratory similarly found
that the share of minorities living within three miles (five kilometers) of a
coal- or oil-fired power plant is 12% larger than the national
average.[[279]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn279)

Other state-level studies have also found disproportionate impacts from the
power sector.**In California, the state’s CalEnviroScreen 3.0 tool shows that
half of all natural gas plants are “located in communities that rank among the
25% most
disadvantaged.”**[[280]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-racism/#_ftn280) In Pennsylvania, one study found that the state’s 88
“existing power plants were disproportionately located near disadvantaged
communities,” and that new proposed plants would exacerbate these
disparities.[[281]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn281)

The power sector has shifted rapidly in recent years, with cheap renewables
and natural gas pushing many coal plants into retirement. A 2020 study found
that recent coal retirements had decreased overall PM2.5 impacts, but
“disparities between White and non-White subgroups increased” and burdens
remains highest for “below-poverty and non-White
subgroups.”[[282]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn282)

A recent study by PERI found that the proportion of Black and Hispanic
residents living within three miles (five kilometers) of a power plant was
higher for natural gas (13.4% Black, 19.8% Hispanic) than for coal (8.1%
Black, 6.1% Hispanic). While overall co-pollutant damages from coal are
roughly eight times higher than for natural gas, the coal impact on Hispanic
and Black populations is only three to four times greater than natural gas.
This data indicates that a climate policy that prioritizes switching from coal
to natural gas as a “bridge fuel” risks worsening relative pollution
disparities, and in some cases, increasing absolute pollution levels in
minority
communities.[[283]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn283)

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/bf5d5541-gp0stqt2b_medium_res_with_credit_line-1024x652.jpg)Billboard
Messages During Exxon’s Shareholder Meeting in Texas. Billboards addressing
climate change are visible in Dallas, Texas as part of Greenpeace’s campaign
confronting Exxon before its upcoming shareholder meeting.

### Mobile sources and traffic exposure

Mobile sources of air pollution, such as tailpipe emissions from gasoline or
diesel engines in cars and trucks, also have significant health
impacts.[[284]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn284)

#### Public health harm

Mobile sources are a key factor in exposure to both PM2.5 and ozone. The EPA
notes that people who live, work, or attend school near high-traffic roadways
are exposed to higher levels of air pollution and suffer adverse health
impacts as a result.

Studies have found evidence that exposure to traffic is linked to worsened
childhood asthma, cardiovascular
mortality,[[285]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn285) and other adverse
effects.[[286]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn286) The EPA conducted air quality modeling in connection with its
2012 rulemaking on emissions standards for cars and
trucks.[[287]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn287) The agency’s regulatory impact analysis (RIA) concluded that
improved standards would have “substantial” health benefits both in terms of
reduced mortality and net economic benefits.

In March 2020, the Trump administration finalized a much weaker rule that
rolled back the Obama-era standards and revoked California’s unique authority
to set stronger vehicle
standards.[[288]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn288) Taken together, these two rollbacks would increase cumulative
greenhouse gas emissions by over a gigaton from 2020 to
2035.[[289]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn289) Higher levels of air pollution due to the rollback could also
lead to up to 32,000 additional premature deaths from 2017 to
2050.[[290]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn290)

#### Disproportionate impact

Demographic patterns of major U.S. urban areas have been profoundly shaped by
the history of racial discrimination, including policies of redlining and
housing
discrimination.[[291]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-racism/#_ftn291) These patterns were also compounded, in certain U.S.
cities, by decisions in the 1940s and ‘50s to construct major highways through
so-called “blighted” areas, erasing some neighborhoods and hemming others in
with traffic
corridors.[[292]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn292)

Studies are beginning to explore how these historical patterns have persisted
and have uncovered correlations between past redlining practices and present
day health burdens. One study of eight California cities found that
neighborhoods described as high foreclosure risk in the 1930s were currently
associated with higher diesel exhaust pollution levels, higher proportions of
minority and poor residents, and a 2.4 times higher rate of asthma-related
emergency room
visits.[[293]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn293) Another study that looked at 108 cities nationwide found that
previously redlined neighborhoods are disproportionately exposed to extreme
heat, and are an average of 2.6°C hotter than non-redlined
areas.[[294]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn294)

Although the sale of leaded gasoline was phased out by the EPA beginning in
the 1970s, lead persists in the environment and remains a health hazard.
Exposure risks from lead-contaminated soil are often concentrated in urban
centers and reflect historical traffic patterns — and thus historical fossil
fuel usage.[[295]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn295)

The EPA’s 2012 clean car standards RIA presented evidence that people “living
near roads are often socioeconomically disadvantaged,” noting that rental
properties are twice as likely to be located near large highways, railroads or
airports than owner-occupied properties. One U.S.-wide study found “greater
traffic volume and density are associated with larger shares of non-white
residents and lower median household
incomes.”[[296]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn296) Note that air pollution exposure also occurs during daily
travel and at work, and mobility should be taken into account in estimating
exposure.[[297]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn297),[[298]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-racism/#_ftn298)

A number of studies of specific urban areas have also found “higher levels of
traffic-related air pollutants in areas with high minority or poor
populations.”[[299]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn299),[[300]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-
racism/#_ftn300),[[301]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-racism/#_ftn301) The EPA’s 2012 clean car standards RIA also summarized
studies showing that students attending schools with high traffic exposure are
“more likely […] to be of non-white race or Hispanic ethnicity, and more often
live in low socioeconomic status locations.”

## 7\. Climate impacts

Greenhouse gas emissions from fossil fuel usage are the principal factor
driving the climate crisis. Climate change is already manifesting itself in a
myriad of different forms — from sea-level rise to increased flood risk, from
melting permafrost to heat waves, from stronger hurricanes to longer wildfire
seasons — with significant consequences for human health and communities.****

#### Public health harm

The impacts of climate change on human health have been well-studied on both a
global scale[[302]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn302) and in the United
States.[[303]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn303) Globally, climate change “threatens to undermine the past 50
years of gains in public health, disrupting the well-being of communities and
the foundations on which health systems are
built.”[[304]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn304) Should the planet remain on a high emissions trajectory,
changes in rainfall
patterns[[305]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn305) and losses of
biodiversity[[306]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn306) will threaten food security for people living in many
regions.

In the United States, health hazards related to climate change include
“altering exposures to heat waves, floods, droughts, and other extreme events;
vector-, food-, and waterborne infectious diseases; changes in the quality and
safety of air, food, and water; and stresses to mental health and well-
being.”[[307]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn307) Policies to limit emissions could save thousands of lives and
hundreds of billions in health-related costs in the United States by the end
of the century.[[308]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-racism/#_ftn308)

This report has focused on air pollution and its health impacts. Climate
change has the potential to increase ozone concentrations, and by amplifying
wildfire impacts, can increase PM2.5 concentrations during wildfire season.
The 2020 California wildfires are estimated to have contributed to over 1,000
premature deaths due to air pollution
alone.[[309]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn309)

Climate change is predicted to increase the frequency and intensity of heat
waves, hurricanes and tropical storms, floods, droughts, wildfires, and other
weather events. These events can directly harm human health, and can also
disrupt public health and health care systems. It is not always possible to
directly attribute an individual extreme weather event to climate change,
although scientists have made rapid advances in this
area.[[310]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn310) In 2020, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA) identified a record-breaking 22 weather/climate disasters that cost
over $1 billion in damages each, including seven tropical storms, drought and
heatwave in Western states, and the West Coast
wildfires.[[311]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn311) Those 22 events led to 262 deaths and caused a total of $95
billion in damages.

Extreme heat is one of the most direct human health threats arising from
climate change. Places such as the Persian Gulf and South Asia may see heat-
wave temperatures that approach or exceed the “limit of human survivability”
by the end of the century under a high emissions
scenario.[[312]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn312) In the United States, the National Climate Assessment finds
that heat-related deaths from warming will outweigh reductions in winter
mortality. Limiting climate change could reduce excess heat mortality by over
5,000 deaths per year by the end of the century (in comparison to the high
emissions scenario, and without considering
adaptation).[[313]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn313)

![Break Free Action in Washington D.C. © Tim Aubry /
Greenpeace](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/12/b8119a9b-gp0stpuas.jpg)Break Free supporters gather in front
of the White House in Washington, D.C. before marching to the Lincoln Memorial
to call on the Obama administration to stop offshore drilling. © Tim Aubry /
Greenpeace

#### Disproportionate impact

Much like air pollution risk, climate change impacts will be unevenly and
inequitably shared across the United
States[[314]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn314) and the world. Globally, the United Nations has concluded
that “Climate change will have devastating consequences for people in poverty.
Even under the best-case scenario, hundreds of millions will face food
insecurity, forced migration, disease and death.” Climate inaction would be
“disastrous for the global economy and pull vast numbers into
poverty.”[[315]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn315)

Lower-income regions in the Southeast, with the largest Black/African-American
populations in the United States, are among the highest-
risk,[[316]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn316) including many communities already experiencing high
pollution burdens and a legacy of environmental racism. The 2018 National
Climate Assessment concluded, “People and communities are differentially
exposed to hazards and disproportionately affected by climate-related health
risks,” and notes elevated risks for children, older adults, low-income
communities, communities of color, outdoor workers, and “communities
disproportionately burdened by poor environmental quality.” Lower-income
households generally have lower GHG emissions and do not contribute to global
climate change at the same scale as high-income
households.[[317]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn317)

The U.S. health system is already plagued by many of the same concerns about
systemic racism and inequality, as well as a financial structure that leaves
many millions without reliable health insurance. The American Public Health
Association (APHA) has warned that the “same physical, social, economic, and
services environments that are associated with poor health outcomes for low-
income communities and communities of color also increase exposure and
vulnerability to the health impacts of climate
change.”[[318]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn318)

Alaska Native and Indigenous communities are among the first to experience
some of these climate impacts — and are among the United States’ first
internal climate migrants. Retreating sea ice, increased erosion, and winter
storms are forcing several Alaskan villages, such as Kivalina, to relocate to
more secure ground.[[319]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-racism/#_ftn319) Along Louisiana’s coast, rising sea levels and rapid
erosion are also forcing Native communities to consider
relocation.[[320]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn320)

Research has shown that the response to climate-driven natural disasters is
shaped by and can amplify existing
inequalities.[[321]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn321) Studies looking at the aftermath of Hurricanes Maria and
Harvey have found increases in air
pollution,[[322]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn322) threats to water
quality,[[323]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn323) and even the redistribution of existing toxic pollution by
floodwaters.[[324]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn324) In August 2020, Hurricane Laura hit the coast of Louisiana
and was immediately followed by a heat wave, impacting a region already
suffering from the Covid-19 pandemic, health inequalities, and environmental
racism. The hurricane forced emergency shutdowns of numerous refineries and
petrochemical plants along the coast, leading to elevated toxic emissions.
Hurricane damage triggered a catastrophic chemical plant fire near Lake
Charles, releasing chlorine gas and other pollutants, and forcing nearby
residents to shelter-in-place and close windows to avoid
exposure.[[325]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn325)

Urban Heat Islands (UHI) can amplify the impact of warming by increasing heat
exposure during the day and preventing cooling off at night. Research has
found that in 25 cities around the world, 72% of poorer neighborhoods
experienced elevated heat exposure — a factor that was potentially mitigated
by increasing green space in urban
areas.[[326]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn326) The same pattern holds for most cities across the United
States, with studies showing that poor people and people of color live in
hotter
neighborhoods.[[327]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn327),[[328]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-
fuel-racism/#_ftn328) As noted earlier, exposure to extreme heat is associated
with past patterns of
redlining.[[329]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn329) A recent study by the real estate company Redfin also found
that formerly redlined areas faced 25% higher flood risks than non-redlined
areas, and that those risks were disproportionately borne by people of color,
who make up 58% of residents in the formerly redlined neighborhoods
studied.[[330]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn330)

A broad review of health studies found that Black mothers were most at risk
from overlapping exposure to air pollution and heat stress, putting them at
greater risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes such as preterm birth, low birth
weight, and
stillbirth.[[331]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn331) Other groups that face elevated risk of extreme heat include
children, the elderly, and outdoor workers, such as agricultural workers and
others.

![People's Climate March in New York City. © Kate Davison /
Greenpeace](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/218b1fc2-gp0stols0-1024x763.jpg)A participant in the
People’s Climate March shows off her message as she makes her way through the
streets of New York City. The march, two days before the United Nations
Climate Summit, is billed as the largest climate march in history. © Kate
Davison / Greenpeace

## 8\. Policy recommendations

As the nation emerges from the COVID-19 pandemic, President Joe Biden and the
117th Congress have a historic opportunity to kick off an ambitious national
policy program that puts the United States on a path to rapid decarbonization
while ensuring justice for workers and communities. Our national response to
the overlapping crises we face must explicitly aim to end fossil fuel racism.

Fossil fuels generate dangerous pollutants at each stage of their lifecycle,
from hazardous air toxics emitted from fracking wells to deadly criteria air
pollutants and greenhouse gases emitted when they are burned. This pollution
harms public health and is driving civilization into existential crisis — and
these harms are disproportionately carried by Black, Brown, Indigenous, and
poor communities. The time has come to phase out fossil fuel production, build
a better economy to take its place, and ensure that workers and communities
are made better off through the transition.

The current political opportunity to enact policies to address climate change
is also a chance to reduce public health harms and partially alleviate the
history of environmental racism — but only if those goals and stakeholders are
included in policy design from the start. Pursuing “carbon-only” policies with
an eye to extending the life of the fossil fuel industry will only delay and
deny justice for communities suffering from toxic legacies and ongoing
pollution burdens.

President Biden and Congress must confront the overlapping crises we face with
a holistic approach to improve public health, tackle the climate crisis, and
rectify our legacy of systemic racism by phasing out fossil fuel production.
Our policy recommendations are rooted in Greenpeace USA’s  _Just Recovery
Agenda_[[332]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftn332) and the Movement for Black Lives’  _Red, Black, and Green New
Deal_ platform. To truly Build Back Better, President Biden and Congress must:

  1. End fossil fuel racism and reverse the legacies of historical injustices.
  2. Phase out fossil fuel production.
  3. Ensure no worker or community is left behind.
  4. Enact a green and just economic recovery.
  5. Protect and expand our democracy to make it work for all people

### 1\. End fossil fuel racism and reverse the legacies of historical
injustices

We must end fossil fuel racism and reverse the legacies of past injustices by
placing both resources and power in the hands of impacted communities.
Policies to accomplish this vision include:

  * Require air and water pollution reductions in environmental justice communities to reduce pollution and pollution disparities by implementing a comprehensive “No Pollution Hotspots” policy.[[333]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftn333)
  * Study, measure, and mitigate cumulative impacts of pollution from multiple sources, including legacy pollution.
  * Strengthen equity and environmental justice mapping tools to provide more information to the public about health harms and disparities.[[334]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftn334)
  * Institutionalize Free, Prior, and Informed Consent to require consent of American Indian and Alaska Native tribes and Indigenous peoples regarding federal actions affecting their lands, livelihoods, culture, and spirituality.
  * Pass the  _Environmental Justice for All Act_ to provide legal remedies to citizens, improve equity mapping tools, expand grant programs, and strengthen consultation with impacted communities.[[335]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftn335)
  * Elevate environmental justice to the highest levels of governance, including by passing the  _Climate Equity Act_.[[336]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftn336)
  * Strengthen the National Ambient Air Quality Standards to align with the best available science and end the politicization of air pollution at the EPA.
  * Enact stronger standards, monitoring, and enforcement for hazardous air pollutants under the Clean Air Act.

### 2\. Phase out fossil fuel production

We must halt the expansion of fossil fuel production and infrastructure, and
put the industry on track for a just, equitable, and well-managed phaseout of
fossil fuel production consistent with a pathway to limit global warming to
below 1.5°C. This phaseout must go hand-in-hand with investments in economic
security for workers and communities affected during the transition. Policies
to accomplish a fossil fuel phaseout include:

  * Pass the  _End Polluter Welfare Act_ to eliminate federal fossil fuel subsidies, including tax breaks, bailouts, loan guarantees, below-market royalties, and public finance.[[337]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftn337)
  * Reinstate the crude oil export ban[[338]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftn338) and prohibit exports of liquified natural gas (LNG) and coal.
  * Ban new fossil fuel leasing and permitting on public lands and waters, and phase out existing leases.
  * Evaluate lifecycle greenhouse gas emissions for all federal infrastructure projects and reject federal permits for projects that would exacerbate the climate crisis.
  * Strengthen “polluter pays” requirements, including bonding levels and fees, on oil and gas wells and coal mines to ensure fossil fuel corporations pay the full cost of remediation.
  * Pass the  _Break Free from Plastic Pollution Act_.
  * Establish a national plan and targets to wind down existing fossil fuel production and infrastructure.
  * Supporting the establishment of one-mile (minimum 2,500-foot) public health and safety buffer zones to ensure that no oil and gas production occurs near where people live, work, learn, and play.[[339]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftn339)

### 3\. Ensure no worker or community is left behind

We must ensure that workers and communities will be better off during the
transition to a more just and regenerative economy. We must invest in economic
security and opportunities for workers and communities affected by the
transition. Policies to realize this support include:

  * Enact the  _Protecting the Right to Organize (PRO) Act_ to better enable workers to act in solidarity with one another, punish corporations that break the law, limit tactics that intimidate workers, help secure timely collective bargaining agreements, and make it easier for workers to form and join unions.
  * Mandate the use of project labor agreements, Davis-Bacon prevailing wage requirements, community benefit agreements, and high-road labor standards in any federally funded project.
  * Establish a federal oil well remediation program to create 250,000 high-quality jobs cleaning up abandoned oil and gas wells.[[340]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftn340)
  * Provide good jobs cleaning up abandoned mines and fostering economic development in coal communities.
  * Create a federal “Energy Worker and Community Protection Fund”[[341]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftn341) to guarantee wage, benefit, and pension protections for workers affected by the transition away from fossil fuels, replace lost tax and community revenue, and promote community revitalization and economic development for affected communities.

### 4\. Enact a green and just economic recovery

We must enact a green and just economic recovery that includes rigorous
climate standards to keep temperature increases below 1.5°C. Trillions of
dollars in public investment are needed to secure a clean energy economy and
guarantee essential public goods for all people. Strong policies are essential
to ensure justice and equity for Black, Brown, Indigenous, poor people, and
other disadvantaged workers and communities. Policies to accomplish this goal
include:

  * Pass the  _THRIVE Act_ to invest at least $1 trillion per year for the next decade to create 15 million good jobs, cut climate pollution in half by 2030, and confront systemic racism and gender, economic, and environmental injustice.[[342]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftn342)
  * Honor frontline leadership with a representative governing board to guide federal investments.
  * Ensure at least 50% of new investments directly benefit frontline and disadvantaged communities.
  * Ensure federal investments pass a rigorous environmental justice and equity screen to avoid exacerbating “pollution hotspots.”
  * Uphold strong labor, climate, and equity standards to protect and expand workers’ rights, mitigate the climate crisis, and ensure investments repair, rather than exacerbate, historic injustices.

### 5\. Protect and expand our democracy to make it work for all people

Our democracy is in peril. We must protect people’s rights to have a voice in
the democratic process, get corporate money out of politics, defend the
fundamental right to protest, and transform the current system to a people-
powered democracy that works for all. Policies to achieve this vision include:

  * Pass the  _For the People Act_ (H.R.1 / S.1) to give more electoral power to the people by getting big money out of politics, restoring voting rights, offering new protections for voters, ending gerrymandering, and holding government officials accountable.[[343]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftn343)
  * End the Jim Crow filibuster to preserve the will of the majority to enact laws that will address the crises we face and ensure all communities can thrive.
  * Pass the  _John Lewis Voting Rights Act_(H.R.4) to protect against racist voter suppression tactics and strengthen our electoral system.[[344]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftn344)
  * Grant statehood to Washington, D.C., by passing H.R.51, to ensure more than 700,000 thousand residents, a plurality of whom are Black, are afforded the same protections, access, and rights in our democracy that residents of every other state enjoy.[[345]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftn345)
  * Passing a constitutional amendment to overturn the  _Citizens United_ U.S. Supreme Court ruling, which gives corporations and fossil fuel industry leaders unprecedented access to influence elected officials.[[346]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftn346)
  * Enact the _BREATHE Act_ to protect communities from police brutality and racial injustice by investing in Black communities and re-imagining community safety.[[347]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftn347)

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/93b8351d-gp0stt5gb_medium_res_with_credit_line-1024x479.jpg)Senator’s
Green New Deal Press Conference on Capitol Hill.

## Acknowledgements

This report is a joint project of The Movement for Black Lives, Gulf Coast
Center for Law and Policy, and Greenpeace, Inc. (“Greenpeace USA”).

The authors are grateful to the following reviewers for their insightful
feedback and guidance: Noel Healy (Salem State); Aidan Farrow (Greenpeace
International Science Unit); Ashley Thomson, Jonathan Butler, Caroline
Henderson, Charlie Cray, Anusha Narayanan (all with Greenpeace USA); and
Angela Mooney D’Arcy (Sacred Places Institute). We are grateful to Michael Ash
(PERI) for providing their dataset and valuable guidance in analyzing the RSEI
data. Any errors in this report are the responsibility of the authors.

This report was written by Tim Donaghy and Charlie Jiang of Greenpeace USA,
with contributions from Colette Pichon Battle and Emma Collin (Gulf Coast
Center for Law and Policy), and Ryan Schleeter and Janet Redman (Greenpeace
USA). The report was edited by Charlie Jiang and designed by Katie Myer, Kyle
McKibbin, and Jacob Hardbower.

Greenpeace USA acknowledges that the development of this report included
limited consultation with many communities or constituencies discussed herein,
including Indigenous, Latinx, and Asian/Pacific Islander communities and
organizations. Greenpeace USA commits to pursue additional efforts to analyze
and uplift the impacts and role of fossil fuel racism on Indigenous peoples
and Tribal nations, as well as on other communities.

This report is a project of Greenpeace, Inc., a registered Internal Revenue
Service 501(c)(4) non-profit entity.

Greenpeace USA is grateful to the more than 20 organizations that endorsed
this report, and for their continued action in defense of a stable climate and
more just and peaceful world.

[350.org](https://350.org/)
[Action Center on Race and the Economy](https://acrecampaigns.org/)
[Alliance of Nurses for Healthy Environments](https://envirn.org/)
[Anti Police-Terror Project](https://www.antipoliceterrorproject.org/)
[Center for Biological Diversity](https://biologicaldiversity.org/)
[Central California Environmental Justice Network](https://ccejn.org/)
[Communities for a Better Environment](http://www.cbecal.org/)
[Earthworks](https://www.earthworks.org/)
[Friends of the Earth US](https://foe.org/)
[Grassroots Global Justice Alliance](https://ggjalliance.org/)
[GreenFaith](https://greenfaith.org/)
[Idle No More SF Bay](http://www.idlenomoresfbay.org/)
[Indivisible](http://indivisible.org/)

[Kentuckians For The Commonwealth](https://www.kftc.org/)
[Mothers Out Front](https://www.mothersoutfront.org/)
[Movement Generation Justice & Ecology
Project](https://movementgeneration.org/)
[National Hispanic Medical Association](https://www.nhmamd.org/)
[Oil Change International](http://priceofoil.org/)
[Our Climate](https://ourclimate.us/)
[Peoples Action](https://peoplesaction.org/)
[The People’s Justice Council](https://www.thepeoplesjusticecouncil.org/)
[Rainforest Action Network](http://ran.org/)
[RISE St. James](https://www.facebook.com/risestjames/)
[STAND-LA Coalition](https://www.stand.la/)
[Sunrise Movement](http://sunrisemovement.org/)
[Working Families Party](http://workingfamilies.org/)

* * *

## Endnotes

[
[1]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/#_ftnref1)
Farrow, A., Miller, K.A. & Myllyvirta, L. 2020.  _Toxic air: The price of
fossil fuels_. Greenpeace Southeast Asia & Centre for Research on Energy and
Clean Air. February. <https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/wp-
content/uploads/2020/02/The-Price-of-Fossil-Fuels-full-report.pdf>

[[2]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref2) Vohra et al. 2021. Global mortality from outdoor fine
particle pollution generated by fossil fuel combustion: Results from GEOS-
Chem.  _Env. Research_ , 195, 110754.
<https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0013935121000487>

[[3]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref3) Mikati et al. 2018. Disparities in Distribution of
Particulate Matter Emission Sources by Race and Poverty Status.  _American
Journal of Public Health_ , 108, 480-485.
<http://ajph.aphapublications.org/doi/pdf/10.2105/AJPH.2017.304297>

[[4]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref4) Richmond-Bryant et al. 2020. Disparities in Distribution of
Particulate Matter Emissions from US Coal-Fired Power Plants by Race and
Poverty Status After Accounting for Reductions in Operations Between 2015 and
2017.  _American Journal of Public Health_ , 110, 655-661.
<https://ajph.aphapublications.org/doi/abs/10.2105/AJPH.2019.305558>

[[5]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref5) Rowangould, G. 2013. A census of the US near-roadway
population: Public health and environmental justice considerations.  _Transp.
Res. D_., 25, 59-67.
<https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S1361920913001107>

[[6]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref6) Garcia-Gonzalez et al. 2019. Hazardous Air Pollutants
Associated with Upstream Oil and Natural Gas Development: A Critical Synthesis
of Current Peer-Reviewed Literature.  _Annual Review of Public Health_ , 40,
283-304. <https://www.annualreviews.org/doi/10.1146/annurev-
publhealth-040218-043715>

[[7]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref7) Czolowski et al. 2017. Toward consistent methodology to
quantify populations in proximity to oil and gas development: A national
spatial analysis and review.  _Environ Health Perspect_ , 125, 12, 124003.
[https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5963578](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5963578/)

[[8]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref8) Fleischman & Franklin. 2017.  _Fumes Across the Fence-Line:
The Health Impacts of Air Pollution from Oil & Gas Facilities on African
American Communities_. NAACP & Clean Air Task Force.
<https://www.naacp.org/climate-justice-resources/fumes-across-fence-line/>

[[9]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref9) Johnston et al. 2019. Impact of upstream oil extraction and
environmental public health: A review of the evidence.  _Sci Total Environ_ ,
20, 657, 187-199. <https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30537580/>

[[10]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref10) Concerned Health Professionals of New York & Physicians for
Social Responsibility. 2020.  _Compendium of scientific, medical, and media
findings demonstrating risks and harms of fracking (unconventional gas and oil
extraction) (7th ed.)_. <http://concernedhealthny.org/compendium/>

[[11]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref11) Donaghy, T. 2021.  _Research Brief: Environmental Justice
Across Industrial Sectors_. Greenpeace USA, April.
<https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/research/environmental-justice-
industrial-sectors/>

[[12]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref12) Zwickl, K. 2019. The demographics of fracking: A spatial
analysis for four U.S. states.  _Ecological Economics_ , 161, 202-215.
<https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S092180091830661X>

[[13]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref13) Bekkar et al. 2020. Association of Air Pollution and Heat
Exposure With Preterm Birth, Low Birth Weight, and Stillbirth in the USA
Systematic Review.  _JAMA Netw. Open_., 3, 6, e208243.
<https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamanetworkopen/fullarticle/2767260>

[[14]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref14) Hoffman et al. 2020. The Effects of Historical Housing
Policies on Resident Exposure to Intra-Urban Heat: A Study of 108 US Urban
Areas.  _Climate_ , 8, 1, 12. <https://www.mdpi.com/2225-1154/8/1/12/htm>

[[15]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref15) Nardone et al. 2020. Associations between historical
residential redlining and current age-adjusted rates of emergency department
visits due to asthma across eight cities in California: an ecological study.
_Lancet_ , 4, 1, e24-e31.
<https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanplh/article/PIIS2542-5196(19)30241-4/fulltext>

[[16]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref16) Johnston et al. 2016. Wastewater disposal wells, fracking,
and environmental justice in southern Texas.  _American Journal of Public
Health_ , 106, 3, 550-556.
<https://ajph.aphapublications.org/doi/full/10.2105/AJPH.2015.303000>

[[17]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref17) Johnston et al. 2020. Environmental justice dimensions of
oil and gas flaring in South Texas: Disproportionate exposure among Hispanic
communities.  _Environ. Sci. Technol.,_ 54, 10, 6289–6298.
<https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.est.0c00410>

[[18]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref18) Cushing et al. 2020. Flaring from Unconventional Oil and
Gas Development and Birth Outcomes in the Eagle Ford Shale in South Texas.
_Env. Health. Pers._ , 128, 7 _._
<https://ehp.niehs.nih.gov/doi/10.1289/EHP6394>

[[19]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref19) Burr et al. 2018. The Oakville Oil Refinery Closure and Its
Influence on Local Hospitalizations: A Natural Experiment on Sulfur Dioxide.
_Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health_ , 15, 9, 2029.
<https://www.mdpi.com/1660-4601/15/9/2029>

[[20]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref20) Remy et al. 2019. Hospital, health, and community burden
after oil refinery fires, Richmond, California 2007 and 2012.  _Env. Health_ ,
18, 48. <https://link.springer.com/article/10.1186/s12940-019-0484-4>

[[21]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref21) Casey et al. 2018. Retirements of Coal and Oil Power Plants
in California: Association With Reduced Preterm Birth Among Populations
Nearby.  _Am. J. Epidemiol_. 187, 8, 1586–1594.
<https://academic.oup.com/aje/article/187/8/1586/4996680?rss%3D1>

[[22]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref22) Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). 2018:
_Global Warming of 1.5°C_. <https://www.ipcc.ch/sr15/>

[[23]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref23) Union of Concerned Scientists. The Hidden Costs of Fossil
Fuels. <https://www.ucsusa.org/resources/hidden-costs-fossil-fuels>

[[24]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref24) Jefferson, N. & L. Stokes. 2020. Our racist fossil fuel
energy system: The fossil fuel economy is killing Black Americans.  _Boston
Globe_ , July 17. <https://www.bostonglobe.com/2020/07/13/opinion/our-racist-
fossil-fuel-energy-system/>

[[25]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref25) Bullard, R. 1990.  _Dumping in Dixie_. Boulder, CO:
Westview Press.
<https://books.google.com/books/about/Dumping_In_Dixie.html?id=Wh9qiXueaL0C>

[[26]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref26) United Church of Christ Commission for Racial Justice.
1987.  _Toxic Waste and Race in the United States_.
[http://uccfiles.com/pdf/ToxicWastes&Race.pdf](http://uccfiles.com/pdf/ToxicWastes&Race.pdf)

[[27]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref27) Bullard, R. & B. Wright. 1993. Environmental Justice for
all: Community Perspectives on Health and Research.  _Tox. & Ind. Health_, 9,
5, 821-841. <https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/074823379300900508>

[[28]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref28) Bullard et al. 2007. Toxic Wastes and Race at Twenty
1987—2007. UCC Justice & Witness Ministries.
<https://www.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/toxic-wastes-and-race-at-
twenty-1987-2007.pdf>

[[29]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref29) The Biden Plan for a Clean Energy Revolution and
Environmental Justice. <https://joebiden.com/climate-plan/>

[[30]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref30) National Black Environmental Justice Network. Environmental
Justice and Environmental Racism Statement.
<https://www.nbejn.com/environmental-justice-statement>

[[31]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref31) Latner, M. 2018.  _Building a Healthier Democracy: The Link
between Voting Rights and Environmental Justice_. Union of Concerned
Scientists, August. <https://www.ucsusa.org/resources/building-healthier-
democracy>

[[32]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref32) Mapping Inequality: Redlining in New Deal America.
<https://dsl.richmond.edu/panorama/redlining/#loc=5/39.1/-94.58>

[[33]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref33) American Public Health Association. Racism and Health.
<https://www.apha.org/Topics-and-Issues/Health-Equity/Racism-and-health>

[[34]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref34) U.S. Health and Human Services. Office of Minority Health.
Asthma and African Americans.
[https://minorityhealth.hhs.gov/omh/browse.aspx?lvl=4&lvlid=15](https://minorityhealth.hhs.gov/omh/browse.aspx?lvl=4&lvlid=15)

[[35]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref35) Haudenosaunee Confederacy. Who We Are.
<https://www.haudenosauneeconfederacy.com/who-we-are/>

[[36]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref36) Drake Well Museum and Park. Site History.
<https://www.drakewell.org/about-us/site-history>

[[37]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref37) Johnston, J. & L. Cushing. 2020. Chemical Exposures,
Health, and Environmental Justice in Communities Living on the Fenceline of
Industry.  _Curr Envir Health Rpt_ , 7, 48–57.
<https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s40572-020-00263-8>

[[38]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref38) Banzhaf et al. 2019. Environmental Justice: The Economics
of Race, Place, and Pollution.  _Journal of Economic Perspectives_ , 33, 1,
185-208. <https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/jep.33.1.185>

[[39]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref39) Pastor et al. 2005. The Air Is Always Cleaner on the Other
Side: Race, Space, and Ambient Air Toxics Exposures in California.  _Journal
of Urban Affairs_ , 27, 2, 127-148.
<https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.0735-2166.2005.00228.x>

[[40]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref40) Pastor, M. 2007. Environmental Justice: Reflections from
the United States. In Boyce, Narain & Stanton, eds.  _Reclaiming Nature:
Environmental Justice and Ecological Restoration_.
[https://books.google.com/books?hl=en&lr=&id=yq41DgAAQBAJ](https://books.google.com/books?hl=en&lr=&id=yq41DgAAQBAJ)

[[41]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref41) White, R. 2018.  _Life At the Fenceline: Understanding
Cumulative Health Hazards in Environmental Justice Communities_. Environmental
Justice Health Alliance for Chemical Policy Reform, Coming Clean, Campaign for
Healthier Solutions, September. <https://ej4all.org/life-at-the-fenceline>

[[42]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref42) O’Rourke & Connolly. 2003. Just Oil? The Distribution of
Environmental and Social Impacts of Oil Production and Consumption.  _Annual
Review of Environment and Resources_ , 28, 1, 587-617.
<https://www.annualreviews.org/doi/full/10.1146/annurev.energy.28.050302.105617>

[[43]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref43) Healy et al. 2019. Embodied energy injustices: Unveiling
and politicizing the transboundary harms of fossil fuel extractivism and
fossil fuel supply chains.  _Energy Research & Social Science_, 48, 219-234.
<https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2214629618306698>

[[44]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref44) Epstein et al. 2011. Full cost accounting for the life
cycle of coal.  _Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci.,_ 1219, 73–98.
<http://www.coaltrainfacts.org/docs/epstein_full-cost-of-coal.pdf>

[[45]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref45) Temper et al. 2018. The Global Environmental Justice Atlas
(EJAtlas): ecological distribution conflicts as forces for sustainability.
_Sustainability Science_ , 13, 573–584 _._
<https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11625-018-0563-4>

[[46]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref46) Yergin. D. 2009.  _The Prize: The Epic Quest for Oil, Money
& Power_. New York, NY: Free Press.
<https://books.google.com/books/about/The_Prize.html?id=InfonQEACAAJ>

[[47]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref47) Juhasz, A. 2009.  _The Tyranny of Oil: The World’s Most
Powerful Industry–and What We Must Do to Stop It_. New York, NY: Harper
Collins.
<https://books.google.com/books/about/The_Tyranny_of_Oil.html?id=YabTmAEACAAJ>

[[48]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref48) Klare, M. 2002.  _Resource Wars: The New Landscape of
Global Conflict_. New York, NY: Macmillan.
<https://books.google.com/books/about/Resource_Wars.html?id=IPW2KfEJNA8C>

[[49]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref49) Healy et al. 2019

[[50]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref50) Watkins, P. 2021. Black Health in America: Exploring Racial
Disparities in COVID-19 Vaccination Data. Data For Black Lives, February 25.
<https://blog.d4bl.org/racial-disparities-in-covid19-vaccination-data/>

[[51]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref51) Amiri et al. 2021.  _Unmasking the Influence of Air
Pollution, Health Disparities, and Oil and Gas Development on COVID-19_.
Alliance of Nurses for Healthy Environments, January. <https://envirn.org/wp-
content/uploads/2021/01/COVIDFossilFuels_Final.pdf>

[[52]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref52) Ketyer, E. & L. McKenzie. 2021.  _Air Pollution and
Covid-19: A Dangerous Combination_. Physicians for Social Responsibility,
January. <https://www.psr.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/01/air-pollution-and-
covid-19.pdf>

[[53]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref53) Wu et al. 2020. Exposure to air pollution and COVID-19
mortality in the United States: A nationwide cross-sectional study.  _Science
Advances_ , 6, 45. <https://advances.sciencemag.org/content/6/45/eabd4049>

[[54]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref54) Nemeth, J. & S. Rowan. 2020. Is your neighborhood raising
your coronavirus risk? Redlining decades ago set communities up for greater
danger.  _The Conversation_ , May 26. <https://theconversation.com/is-your-
neighborhood-raising-your-coronavirus-risk-redlining-decades-ago-set-
communities-up-for-greater-danger-138256>

[[55]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref55) U.S. EPA. Criteria Air Pollutants.
<https://www.epa.gov/criteria-air-pollutants>

[[56]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref56) U.S. EPA. Particulate Matter (PM) Pollution.
<https://www.epa.gov/pm-pollution>

[[57]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref57) U.S. EPA. Nitrogen Dioxide (NO2) Pollution.
<https://www.epa.gov/no2-pollution>

[[58]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref58) U.S. EPA. Sulfur Dioxide (SO2) Pollution.
<https://www.epa.gov/so2-pollution>

[[59]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref59) U.S. EPA. Ground-level Ozone Pollution.
<https://www.epa.gov/ground-level-ozone-pollution>

[[60]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref60) Rasmussen et al. 2013. The ozone–climate penalty: Past,
present, and future.  _Environmental Science & Technology_, 47, 24,
14258–14266. <https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/es403446m>

[[61]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref61) U.S. EPA. Carbon Monoxide (CO) Pollution in Outdoor Air.
<https://www.epa.gov/co-pollution>

[[62]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref62) U.S. EPA. Lead (Pb) Air Pollution.
<https://www.epa.gov/lead-air-pollution>

[[63]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref63) U.S. EPA. Hazardous Air Pollutants.
<https://www.epa.gov/haps>

[[64]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref64) Garcia-Gonzalez et al. 2019

[[65]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref65) Dalsøren et al. 2018. Discrepancy between simulated and
observed ethane and propane levels explained by underestimated fossil
emissions.  _Nature Geoscience_ , 11, 178–184.
<https://www.nature.com/articles/s41561-018-0073-0>

[[66]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref66) Rajabi et al. 2020. Emissions of volatile organic compounds
from crude oil processing – Global emission inventory and environmental
release.  _Sci Total Environ_ , 727, 20, 138654.
<https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0048969720321707>

[[67]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref67) Earthworks. Hydrogen Sulfide.
<https://www.earthworks.org/issues/hydrogen_sulfide/>

[[68]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref68) U.S. EPA. Toxics Release Inventory (TRI) Program.
<https://www.epa.gov/toxics-release-inventory-tri-program>

[[69]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref69) U.S. EPA. Risk-Screening Environmental Indicators (RSEI)
Model. <https://www.epa.gov/rsei>

[[70]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref70) U.S. EPA. National Air Toxics Assessment.
<https://www.epa.gov/national-air-toxics-assessment>

[[71]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref71) U.S. EPA. EJSCREEN: Environmental Justice Screening and
Mapping Tool. <https://www.epa.gov/ejscreen>

[[72]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref72) Belluz, J. & S. Hoffman. 2015. The one chart you need to
understand any health study. Vox, January 5.
<https://www.vox.com/2015/1/5/7482871/types-of-study-design>

[[73]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref73) Collins et al. 2016. Linking ‘toxic outliers’ to
environmental justice communities.  _Environ. Res. Lett._ ,11, 015004 _._
<https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1748-9326/11/1/015004/pdf>

[[74]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref74) U.S. EPA. The NRC Risk Assessment Paradigm.
<https://www.epa.gov/fera/nrc-risk-assessment-paradigm>

[[75]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref75) U.S. EPA. Integrated Science Assessments (ISAs).
<https://www.epa.gov/isa>

[[76]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref76) U.S. EPA Science Advisory Board. 2008. Benefits of Reducing
Benzene Emissions in Houston, 1990–2020. EPA-COUNCIL-08-001.
<https://yosemite.epa.gov/sab/sabproduct.nsf/D4D7EC9DAEDA8A548525748600728A83/$File/EPA-
COUNCIL-08-001-unsigned.pdf>

[[77]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref77) Clough, E. & D. Bell. 2016. Just fracking: a distributive
environmental justice analysis of unconventional gas development in
Pennsylvania, USA.  _Environ. Res. Lett._ , 11, 025001.
<https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1748-9326/11/2/025001>

[[78]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref78) Mohai, P. & R. Saha. 2015. Which came first, people or
pollution? A review of theory and evidence from longitudinal environmental
justice studies.  _Environ. Res. Lett.,_ 10, 125011.
<https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1748-9326/10/12/125011/meta>

[[79]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref79) Michaels, D. 2020.  _The Triumph of Doubt: Dark Money and
the Science of Deception_.

[[80]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref80) Carter et al. 2019.  _The State of Science in the Trump
Era: Damage Done, Lessons Learned, and a Path to Progress_. Union of Concerned
Scientists, January. <https://www.ucsusa.org/resources/state-science-trump-
era>

[[81]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref81) Frey, H.C. 2020. EPA decides to reject the latest science,
endanger public health and ignore the law by keeping an outdated fine particle
air pollution standard. The Conversation, May 1.
<https://theconversation.com/epa-decides-to-reject-the-latest-science-
endanger-public-health-and-ignore-the-law-by-keeping-an-outdated-fine-
particle-air-pollution-standard-136226>

[[82]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref82) IPCC 1.5

[[83]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref83) SEI, IISD, ODI, E3G, and UNEP. 2020.  _The Production Gap
Report: 2020 Special Report_. <https://productiongap.org/2020report/>

[[84]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref84) Muttitt, G. 2016.  _The Sky’s Limit: Why The Paris Climate
Goals Require a Managed Decline of Fossil Fuel Production_. Oil Change
International. September.
<http://priceofoil.org/content/uploads/2016/09/OCI_the_skys_limit_2016_FINAL_2.pdf>

[[85]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref85) Erickson et al. 2018. Limiting fossil fuel production as
the next big step in climate policy.  _Nature Climate Change_ , 8, 12,
1037-1043. <https://www.nature.com/articles/s41558-018-0337-0>

[[86]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref86) Donaghy, T. 2019.  _Real Climate Leadership: Why The Next
President Must Prioritize A Fossil Fuel Phase Out_. Greenpeace USA, June.
<https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-phaseout/>

[[87]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref87) Muttitt, G. & S. Kartha. 2020. Equity, climate justice and
fossil fuel extraction: principles for a managed phase out.  _Climate Policy_
, 20, 8, 1024-1042.
<https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/14693062.2020.1763900>

[[88]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref88) Cohen et al. 2017. Estimates and 25-year trends of the
global burden of disease attributable to ambient air pollution: an analysis of
data from the Global Burden of Diseases Study 2015.  _Lancet_ , 389, 10082,
1907-1918.
<https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(17)30505-6/fulltext>

[[89]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref89) Academy of Science of South Africa, et al. 2019. Air
Pollution and Health – A Science-Policy Initiative.  _Annals of Global Health_
, 85, 1,140. <https://annalsofglobalhealth.org/articles/10.5334/aogh.2656/>

[[90]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref90) Zhang et al. 2018. Long-term trends in the ambient PM2.5-
and O3-related mortality burdens in the United States under emission
reductions from 1990 to 2010.  _Atmos. Chem. Phys_ , 18, 15003–15016.
<https://acp.copernicus.org/articles/18/15003/2018/>

[[91]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref91) Di et al. 2017. Air Pollution and Mortality in the Entire
Medicare Population.  _N Engl J Med_ , 376, 2513-2522.
<https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/nejmoa1702747>

[[92]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref92) Perera, F. 2018. Pollution from Fossil-Fuel Combustion is
the Leading Environmental Threat to Global Pediatric Health and Equity:
Solutions Exist.  _Int J Environ Res Public Health_ , 15, 1, 16.
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5800116/>

[[93]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref93) Goodkind et al. 2019. Fine-scale damage estimates of
particulate matter air pollution reveal opportunities for location-specific
mitigation of emissions.  _PNAS_ , 116, 18, 8775-8780.
<https://www.pnas.org/content/pnas/116/18/8775.full.pdf>

[[94]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref94) Shindell, D. & C.J. Smith. 2019. Climate and air-quality
benefits of a realistic phase-out of fossil fuels.  _Nature_ , 573, 408–411.
<https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-019-1554-z>

[[95]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref95) Lelieveld et al. 2019. Effects of fossil fuel and total
anthropogenic emission removal on public health and climate.  _PNAS_ , 116 15,
7192-7197. <https://www.pnas.org/content/116/15/7192>

[[96]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref96) Rao et al. 2016. A multi-model assessment of the co-
benefits of climate mitigation for global air quality.  _Environ. Res. Lett.,_
11, 124013.
<https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1748-9326/11/12/124013>

[[97]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref97) Van Dyck et al. 2018. Air quality co-benefits for human
health and agriculture counterbalance costs to meet Paris Agreement pledges.
_Nature Communications_ , 9, 4939.
<https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-018-06885-9>

[[98]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref98) Markandya et al. 2018. Health co-benefits from air
pollution and mitigation costs of the Paris Agreement: a modelling study.
_Lancet Planetary Health_ , 2, 3, e126-e133.
<http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanpla/article/PIIS2542-5196(18)30029-9/fulltext>

[[99]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref99) Wang et al. 2020. Health co-benefits of achieving
sustainable net-zero greenhouse gas emissions in California.  _Nature
Sustainability_ , 3, 597–605.
<https://www.nature.com/articles/s41893-020-0520-y>

[[100]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref100) California Environmental Justice Alliance. 2017.
Environmental Justice Issues in California’s Cap and Trade System.
<https://caleja.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/04/EJissuesinCAcapandtrade.pdf>

[[101]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref101) Shonkoff et al. 2011. The climate gap: environmental
health and equity implications of climate change and mitigation policies in
California—a review of the literature.  _Climatic Change_ , 109, 485–503.
<https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10584-011-0310-7>

[[102]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref102) Cushing et al. 2018. Carbon trading, co-pollutants, and
environmental equity: Evidence from California’s cap-and-trade program
(2011–2015).  _PLOS Medicine_ , 15, 7, e1002604.
<https://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/article?id=10.1371/journal.pmed.1002604>

[[103]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref103) Johnson, N. 2020. Cap and Trade-Offs: Did California’s
landmark legislation help or hurt the state’s most vulnerable?  _Grist_ ,
October 19. <https://grist.org/climate/the-biggest-fight-over-cap-and-trade-
isnt-about-what-you-think-it-is/>

[[104]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref104) Diana, B., M. Ash & J. Boyce. 2021._Green for All:
Integrating Air Quality and Environmental Justice into the Clean Energy
Transition_. Political Economy Research Institute, March.
<https://www.peri.umass.edu/publication/item/1408-green-for-all-integrating-
air-quality-and-environmental-justice-into-the-clean-energy-transition>

[[105]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref105) Gupte, E. & P. VanLaningham. 2021. US’ Occidental supplies
first cargo of ‘carbon-neutral crude’ to India’s Reliance. Platts, January 29.
<https://www.spglobal.com/platts/en/market-insights/latest-news/oil/012921-us-
occidental-supplies-first-cargo-of-carbon-neutral-crude-to-indias-reliance>

[[106]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref106) European Environment Agency. 2011. Air pollution impacts
from carbon capture and storage (CCS). Technical report No 14/2011.
<https://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/carbon-capture-and-storage>

[[107]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref107) Jacobson, M. 2019. The health and climate impacts of
carbon capture and direct air capture. Energy Environ. Sci., 12, 3567.
<https://web.stanford.edu/group/efmh/jacobson/Articles/Others/19-CCS-DAC.pdf>

[[108]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref108) Curry, M. 2021. Environmental Justice Members Resign from
CARB Task Force on Carbon Offsets. Streetsblog Cal, February 11.
<https://cal.streetsblog.org/2021/02/11/environmental-justice-members-resign-
from-carb-task-force-on-carbon-offsets/>

[[109]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref109) Song, L. 2019. An Even More Inconvenient Truth: Why Carbon
Credits For Forest Preservation May Be Worse Than Nothing.  _ProPublica_ , May
22. <https://features.propublica.org/brazil-carbon-offsets/inconvenient-truth-
carbon-credits-dont-work-deforestation-redd-acre-cambodia/>

[[110]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref110) American Petroleum Institute. 2021. API Outlines Path for
Low-Carbon Future in New Climate Action Framework. March.
<https://www.api.org/news-policy-and-issues/news/2021/03/24/climate-action-
framework>

[[111]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref111) Roberts, D. 2020. At last, a climate policy platform that
can unite the left.  _Vox_ , July 9. <https://www.vox.com/energy-and-
environment/21252892/climate-change-democrats-joe-biden-renewable-energy-
unions-environmental-justice>

[[112]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref112) Center for International Environmental Law. Smoke and
Fumes. <https://www.smokeandfumes.org/fumes>

[[113]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref113) Supran, G. & N. Oreskes. 2017. Assessing ExxonMobil’s
climate change communications (1977–2014).  _Environ. Res. Lett._ , 12,
084019. https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1748-9326/aa815f

[[114]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref114) Exxon Secrets. ExxonMobil Climate Denial Funding
1998-2014. https://exxonsecrets.org/

[[115]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref115) Milman, O. 2021. Oil firms knew decades ago fossil fuels
posed grave health risks, files reveal.  _The Guardian_ , March 18.
https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2021/mar/18/oil-industry-fossil-fuels-
air-pollution-documents

[[116]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref116) Czolowski et al. 2017

[[117]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref117) U.S. Energy Information Administration. Frequently Asked
Questions (FAQS).
[https://www.eia.gov/tools/faqs/faq.php?id=907&t=8](https://www.eia.gov/tools/faqs/faq.php?id=907&t=8);
[https://www.eia.gov/tools/faqs/faq.php?id=847&t=6](https://www.eia.gov/tools/faqs/faq.php?id=847&t=6)

[[118]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref118) PSE Healthy Energy. ROGER Citation Database.
<https://www.psehealthyenergy.org/our-work/shale-gas-research-library/>

[[119]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref119) Shonkoff, S. & L.A. Hill. 2019.  _Human health and oil and
gas development: A review of the peer-reviewed literature and assessment of
applicability to the City of Los Angeles_. PSE Healthy Energy, August.
<https://www.psehealthyenergy.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/08/Literature-
Review.pdf>

[[120]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref120) Compendium v7.0

[[121]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref121) Long et al. 2015.  _An Independent Scientific Assessment
of Well Stimulation in California, Summary Report: An Examination of Hydraulic
Fracturing and Acid Stimulations in the Oil and Gas Industry_. California
Council on Science and Technology (CCST), July. <https://ccst.us/reports/well-
stimulation-in-california/>

[[122]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref122) Wong, N. 2017. Existing scientific literature on setback
distances from oil and gas development sites. STAND-LA.
<https://www.stand.la/uploads/5/3/9/0/53904099/2500_literature_review_report-v2-share.pdf>

[[123]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref123) Johnston et al. 2019

[[124]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref124) Schade, G. 2017. How has the US fracking boom affected air
pollution in shale areas?  _The Conversation_ , November 2.
<https://theconversation.com/how-has-the-us-fracking-boom-affected-air-
pollution-in-shale-areas-66190>

[[125]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref125) Allred et al. 2015. Ecosystem services lost to oil and gas
in North America.  _Science_ , 348, 6233, 401-402.
<https://science.sciencemag.org/content/348/6233/401>

[[126]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref126) Ridlington, E., K. Norman & R. Richardson. 2016.
_Fracking by the Numbers: The Damage to Our Water, Land and Climate from a
Decade of Dirty Drilling_. April, Environment America & Frontier Group.
<http://www.environmentamerica.org/sites/environment/files/reports/Fracking%20by%20the%20Numbers%20vUS.pdf>

[[127]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref127) U.S. EPA. Understanding Global Warming Potentials.
<https://www.epa.gov/ghgemissions/understanding-global-warming-potentials>

[[128]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref128) Alvarez et al. 2018. Assessment of methane emissions from
the U.S. oil and gas supply chain. Science, 361, 6398, 186-188.
<https://science.sciencemag.org/content/361/6398/186>

[[129]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref129) Sarofim et al. 2017. Valuing the ozone-related health
benefits of methane emission controls.  _Environ Resource Econ_ , 66, 45–63.
<https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/s10640-015-9937-6.pdf>

[[130]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref130) Shindell et al. 2017. The social cost of methane: Theory
and applications.  _Faraday Discuss._ , 200, 429-451.
<https://pubs.rsc.org/en/content/articlelanding/fd/2017/c7fd00009j#!divAbstract>

[[131]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref131) Garcia-Gonzalez et al. 2019

[[132]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref132) Bolden et al. 2018. Exploring the endocrine activity of
air pollutants associated with unconventional oil and gas extraction.
_Environmental Health_ , 17, 26.
<https://ehjournal.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12940-018-0368-z>

[[133]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref133) Carter, L. & T. Donaghy. 2019. Exxon and BP among worst
for flaring in US oil fields despite green pledges.  _Unearthed_ , October 17.
<https://unearthed.greenpeace.org/2019/10/17/exxon-bp-flaring-united-states-
climate-change/>

[[134]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref134) Dix et al. 2019. Nitrogen Oxide Emissions from U.S. Oil
and Gas Production: Recent Trends and Source Attribution.  _Geophysical Res.
Lett._ , 47, e2019GL085866.
<https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1029/2019GL085866>

[[135]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref135) Macey et al. 2014. Air concentrations of volatile
compounds near oil and gas production: a community-based exploratory study.
_Environmental Health_ , 13, 82.
<https://ehjournal.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1476-069X-13-82>

[[136]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref136) Garcia-Gonzalez et al. 2019b. Distance decay gradients in
hazardous air pollution concentrations around oil and natural gas facilities
in the city of Los Angeles: A pilot study.  _Env. Research_ , 173, 232-236.
<https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0013935119301550>

[[137]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref137) Paulik et al. 2018. Environmental and individual PAH
exposures near rural natural gas extraction.  _Env. Pollution_ , 241, 397-405.
<https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0269749117347176>

[[138]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref138) Cushing et al. 2021. Up in smoke: characterizing the
population exposed to flaring from unconventional oil and gas development in
the contiguous US.  _Environ.__Res. Lett._ , 16, 034032.
<https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1748-9326/abd3d4>

[[139]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref139) Buonocore et al. 2021. Air Quality and Health Benefits of
Methane Policies in the United States Oil & Gas Sector. Under review.

[[140]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref140) Finkel, M. 2016. Shale gas development and cancer
incidence in southwest Pennsylvania.  _Public Health_ , 141, 198-206.
<https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0033350616302396>

[[141]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref141) McKenzie et al. 2017. Childhood hematologic cancer and
residential proximity to oil and gas development.  _PLoS One_ , 12, 2,
e0170423
<https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0170423>

[[142]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref142) McMullin et al. 2018. Exposures and Health Risks from
Volatile Organic Compounds in Communities Located near Oil and Gas Exploration
and Production Activities in Colorado (U.S.A.).  _Int. J. Environ. Res. Public
Health_ , 15, 7, 1500. <https://www.mdpi.com/1660-4601/15/7/1500>

[[143]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref143) McKenzie et al. 2018. Ambient Nonmethane Hydrocarbon
Levels Along Colorado’s Northern Front Range: Acute and Chronic Health Risks.
_Environ Sci Technol_., 52, 8, 4514-4525.
<https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29584423/>

[[144]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref144) McKenzie et al. 2012. Human Health Risk Assessment of Air
Emissions From Development of Unconventional Natural Gas Resources.  _Sci
Total Environ_ , 424, 79-87. <https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22444058/>

[[145]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref145) Gonzalez et al. 2020. Oil and gas production and
spontaneous preterm birth in the San Joaquin Valley, CA: A case–control study.
_Environmental Epidemiology,_ 4, 4, e099.
<https://journals.lww.com/environepidem/Fulltext/2020/08000/Oil_and_gas_production_and_spontaneous_preterm.1.aspx>

[[146]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref146) Tran et al. 2020. Residential Proximity to Oil and Gas
Development and Birth Outcomes in California: A Retrospective Cohort Study of
2006–2015 Births.  _Env. Health. Pers._ , 128, 6.
<https://ehp.niehs.nih.gov/doi/full/10.1289/EHP5842>

[[147]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref147) Cushing et al. 2020

[[148]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref148) McKenzie et al. 2014. Birth Outcomes and Maternal
Residential Proximity to Natural Gas Development in Rural Colorado.  _Env.
Health. Pers._ , 122, 4 _._
<https://ehp.niehs.nih.gov/doi/10.1289/ehp.1306722>

[[149]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref149) Currie et al. 2017. Hydraulic fracturing and infant
health: New evidence from Pennsylvania.  _Science Advances_ , 3, 12, e1603021.
<https://advances.sciencemag.org/content/3/12/e1603021>

[[150]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref150) Apergis et al. 2019. Fracking and infant mortality: fresh
evidence from Oklahoma.  _Environmental Science and Pollution Research_ , 26,
32360–32367. <https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11356-019-06478-z>

[[151]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref151) Cheadle et al. 2017. Surface ozone in the Colorado
northern Front Range and the influence of oil and gas development during
FRAPPE/DISCOVER-AQ in summer 2014.  _Elementa_ , 5, 61.
<https://online.ucpress.edu/elementa/article/doi/10.1525/elementa.254/112466/Surface-
ozone-in-the-Colorado-northern-Front-Range>

[[152]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref152) Pozzer et al. 2020. Impact of U.S. Oil and Natural Gas
Emission Increases on Surface Ozone Is Most Pronounced in the Central United
States.  _Environ. Sci. Technol_., 54, 19, 12423–12433.
<https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.est.9b06983>

[[153]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref153) Li et al. 2019. Effects of ambient ozone concentrations
with different averaging times on asthma exacerbations: A meta-analysis.
_Sci. Tot. Environ_ , 691, 549-561.
<https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0048969719329559>

[[154]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref154) Shamasunder et al. 2018. Community-Based Health and
Exposure Study around Urban Oil Developments in South Los Angeles.  _Int. J.
Environ. Res. Public Health_ , 15, 1, 138.
<https://www.mdpi.com/1660-4601/15/1/138>

[[155]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref155) Rasmussen et al. 2016. Association Between Unconventional
Natural Gas Development in the Marcellus Shale and Asthma Exacerbations.
_JAMA Intern. Med_., 176, 9, 1334-1343
<https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamainternalmedicine/article-
abstract/2534153>

[[156]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref156) Willis et al. 2018. Unconventional natural gas development
and pediatric asthma hospitalizations in Pennsylvania.  _Env. Research_ , 166,
402-408.
<https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S001393511830183X>

[[157]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref157) McAlexander et al. 2020. Unconventional Natural Gas
Development and Hospitalization for Heart Failure in Pennsylvania.  _J Am Coll
Cardiol_., 76, 24, 2862-2874. <https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33303076/>

[[158]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref158) McKenzie et al. 2018. Relationships between Indicators of
Cardiovascular Disease and Intensity of Oil and Natural Gas Activity in
Northeastern Colorado.  _Environ Res._ , 170, 56–64.
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6360130/>

[[159]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref159) Apergis et al. 2021. An analysis of the impact of
unconventional oil and gas activities on public health: New evidence across
Oklahoma counties. Energy Economics, 97, 105223.
<https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0140988321001286>

[[160]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref160) Compendium v7.0

[[161]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref161) Compendium v7.0

[[162]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref162) Kroepsch et al. 2019. Environmental justice in
unconventional oil and natural gas drilling and production: A critical review
and research agenda.  _Environ. Sci. Technol._ , 53, 12, 6601–6615.
<https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.est.9b00209>

[[163]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref163) Clough. 2018. Environmental justice and fracking: A
review.  _Current Opinion in Environmental Science & Health_, 3, 14-18.
<https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S2468584417300478>

[[164]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref164) Johnston et al. 2016

[[165]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref165) Bienkowski, B. 2016. Fracking’s Costs Fall
Disproportionately on the Poor and Minorities in South Texas.  _Environmental
Health News_ , February 17. <https://insideclimatenews.org/news/17022016/poor-
minorities-carry-burden-fracking-waste-south-texas-eagle-ford-shale/>

[[166]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref166) Johnston et al. 2020

[[167]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref167) Cushing et al. 2020 ; see also Johnston & Cushing. 2020.
The Risk of Preterm Birth Rises Near Gas Flaring, Reflecting Deep-rooted
Environmental Injustices in Rural America.  _DesmogBlog_ , August 20.
<https://www.desmogblog.com/2020/08/20/preterm-birth-gas-flaring-eagle-ford-
shale-injustices>

[[168]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref168) Cushing et al. 2021

[[169]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref169) Clough & Bell 2016

[[170]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref170) Ogneva-Himmelberger & Huang. 2015. Spatial distribution of
unconventional gas wells and human populations in the Marcellus Shale in the
United States: Vulnerability analysis.  _Applied Geography_ , 60, 165-174.
<https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0143622815000776>

[[171]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref171) Srebotnjak & Rotkin-Ellman. 2014.  _Drilling in
California: Who’s at risk?_ NRDC, October.
<https://www.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/california-fracking-risks-
report.pdf>

[[172]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref172) Ferrar, K. 2020.  _People and Production: Reducing Risk in
California Extraction_. FracTracker Alliance, December 17.
<https://www.fractracker.org/2020/12/people-and-production/>

[[173]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref173) Ferrar, K. 2020.  _Systematic Racism in Kern County Oil
and Gas Permitting Ordinance_. FracTracker Alliance, June 8.
<https://www.fractracker.org/2020/06/systematic-racism-in-kern-county-oil-and-
gas-permitting-ordinance/>

[[174]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref174) Liberty Hill Foundation. 2015.  _The Community
Consequences of Expanded Oil Development in Los Angeles_.
<https://www.libertyhill.org/sites/default/files/Drilling%20Down%20Report%20-%20Full.pdf>

[[175]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref175) Cumming, D. 2018. Black Gold, White Power: Mapping Oil,
Real Estate, and Racial Segregation in the Los Angeles Basin, 1900-1939.
_Engaging Science, Technology, and Society_ , 4, 85-110.
<https://estsjournal.org/article/view/212>

[[176]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref176) Zwickl 2019

[[177]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref177) Fry et al. 2015. Fracking and environmental (in)justice in
a Texas city.  _Ecological Economics_. 117, 97-107.
<https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0921800915002438?via%3Dihub>

[[178]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref178) McKenzie et al. 2016. Population Size, Growth, and
Environmental Justice Near Oil and Gas Wells in Colorado.  _Environ. Sci.
Technol_., 50, 21, 11471–11480.
<https://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/acs.est.6b04391>

[[179]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref179) Native Women’s Wilderness. Murdered & Missing Indigenous
Women. <https://www.nativewomenswilderness.org/mmiw>

[[180]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref180) The Firelight Group with Lake Babine Nation and Nak’azdli
Whut’en. 2017.  _Indigenous Communities and Industrial Camps: Promoting
Healthy Communities in Settings of Industrial Change_.
<https://firelight.ca/wp-content/uploads/2016/03/Firelight-work-camps-
Feb-8-2017_FINAL.pdf>

[[181]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref181) Skylar Joseph, A. 2021. A Modern Trail of Tears: The
Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women (MMIW) Crisis in the US.  _J. Forensic &
Legal Med_., 79, 102136.
<https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S1752928X21000214>

[[182]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref182) Wei-Haas, M. 2017. Why Black Lung Disease Is Deadlier Than
Ever Before.  _Smithsonian_ , May 15. <https://www.smithsonianmag.com/science-
nature/black-lung-disease-deadlier-than-ever-before-180963303/>

[[183]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref183) National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health.
2018. Prevalence of Black Lung Continues to Increase among U.S. Coal Miners.
July 20. <https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/updates/upd-07-20-18.html>

[[184]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref184) See discussion and references in Epstein et al. 2011.

[[185]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref185) Ockerman, E. 2017. African Americans in Appalachia fight
to be seen as a part of coal country.  _Washington Post_ , August 10.
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-nation/wp/2017/08/10/african-
americans-in-appalachia-fight-to-be-seen-as-a-part-of-coal-country/>

[[186]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref186) Appalachian Regional Commission. Poverty Rates in
Appalachia, 2013–2017. <https://www.arc.gov/map/poverty-rates-in-
appalachia-2013-2017/>; County Economic Status in Appalachia, FY 2019.
<https://www.arc.gov/map/county-economic-status-in-appalachia-fy-2019/>

[[187]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref187) Hendryx, M. 2010. Poverty and Mortality Disparities in
Central Appalachia: Mountaintop Mining and Environmental Justice.  _J. Health
Disp. Res. & Prac_., 4, 3, 6.
<https://digitalscholarship.unlv.edu/jhdrp/vol4/iss3/6>

[[188]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref188) Lobao et al. 2016. Poverty, Place, and Coal Employment
across Appalachia and the United States in a New Economic Era.  _Rural
Sociology_ , 81, 3, 343-386.
<https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/ruso.12098>

[[189]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref189) U.S. EIA. 2019. Sixteen mines in the Powder River Basin
produce 43% of U.S. coal.  _Today in Energy_ , August 26.
<https://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=41053>

[[190]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref190) U.S. Census Bureau. 2019 population estimates for
Campbell, Converse, Johnson, Weston and Sheridan counties in Wyoming, and Big
Horn, Rosebud County and Powder River counties in Montana.
<https://www.census.gov/data/tables/time-series/demo/popest/2010s-counties-
detail.html>

[[191]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref191) Allison, J. 2012. From Survival to Sovereignty: 1970s
Energy Development and Indian Self-Determination in Montana’s Powder River
Basin.  _Environmental Justice_ , 5, 5, 252-263.
<https://www.liebertpub.com/doi/10.1089/env.2011.0032>

[[192]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref192) Chan, C. 2017. Coal War.  _Reuters_ , August 21.
<http://fingfx.thomsonreuters.com/gfx/rngs/USA-TRUMP-
TRIBES/010050FH10J/index.html>

[[193]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref193) Hazardous Substance Research Centers/South & Southwest
Outreach Program. 2003. Environmental Impact of the Petroleum Industry.
<https://cfpub.epa.gov/ncer_abstracts/index.cfm/fuseaction/display.files/fileID/14522>

[[194]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref194) Ragothaman & Anderson. 2017. Air Quality Impacts of
Petroleum Refining and Petrochemical Industries.  _Environments, 4, 3, 66._
<https://www.mdpi.com/2076-3298/4/3/66/htm>

[[195]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref195) U.S. EPA. EasyRSEI Dashboard.
<https://edap.epa.gov/public/extensions/EasyRSEI/EasyRSEI.html>

[[196]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref196) Ash et al. 2009.  _Justice in the Air: Tracking Toxic
Pollution from America’s Industries and Companies to our States, Cities, and
Neighborhoods_. Political Economy Research Institute (PERI).
<http://www.peri.umass.edu/fileadmin/pdf/dpe/ctip/justice_in_the_air.pdf>

[[197]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref197) Ash & Boyce. 2011. Measuring corporate environmental
justice performance.  _Corporate Social Responsibility and Environmental
Management_ , 18, 2, 61-79.
<https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/csr.238>

[[198]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref198) Donaghy 2021

[[199]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref199) Fleischman & Franklin 2017

[[200]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref200) Barbone et al. 2019. A Panel Study on Lung Function and
Bronchial Inflammation among Children Exposed to Ambient SO2 from an Oil
Refinery.  _Int J Environ Res Public Health_ , 16, 6, 1057.
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6466338/>

[[201]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref201) Alwahaibi & Zeka. 2015. Respiratory and allergic health
effects in a young population in proximity of a major industrial park in Oman.
_J Epidemiol Community Health_ , 70, 2, 174–180.
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4752616/>

[[202]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref202) Yuan et al. 2018. Increased cancers among residents living
in the neighborhood of a petrochemical complex: A 12-year retrospective cohort
study.  _Int J Hyg Environ Health_ , 221, 2, 308-314.
<https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29287935/>

[[203]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref203) Lin et al. 2017. Lung cancer mortality of residents living
near petrochemical industrial complexes: a meta-analysis.  _Environ Health_ ,
16, 101. <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5615452/>

[[204]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref204) Domingo et al. 2020. Health risks for the population
living near petrochemical industrial complexes. 1. Cancer risks: A review of
the scientific literature.  _Env. Research_ , 186, 109495.
<https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0013935120303881>

[[205]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref205) Chang et al. 2020. Incidence of Respiratory Symptoms for
Residents Living Near a Petrochemical Industrial Complex: A Meta-Analysis.
_Int J Environ Res Public Health_ , 17, 7, 2474.
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7178237/>

[[206]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref206) Marqués et al. 2020. Health risks for the population
living near petrochemical industrial complexes. 2. Adverse health outcomes
other than cancer.  _Sci. Tot. Environ_ , 730, 139122.
<https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0048969720326395>

[[207]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref207) Burr et al. 2018

[[208]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref208) Levin et al. 2016.  _Breakdowns in Air Quality: Air
Pollution from Industrial Malfunctions and Maintenance in Texas_.
Environmental Integrity Project & Environment Texas.
<https://environmentalintegrity.org/reports/breakdowns-in-air-quality/>

[[209]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref209) Louisiana Bucket Brigade. Refinery Accident Database.
<https://labucketbrigade.org/pollution-tools-resources/refinery-accident-
database/>

[[210]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref210) D’Andrea & Reddy. 2016. Detrimental Health Effects of
Benzene Exposure in Adults After a Flaring Disaster at the BP Refinery Plant
in Texas City.  _Disaster Med Public Health Prep_., 10, 2, 233-239.
<https://doi.org/10.1017/dmp.2015.160>

[[211]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref211) D’Andrea & Reddy. 2017. Adverse Health Complaints of
Adults Exposed to Benzene After a Flaring Disaster at the BP Refinery Facility
in Texas City, Texas.  _Disaster Med Public Health Prep_., 12, 2, 232-240.
<https://doi.org/10.1017/dmp.2017.59>

[[212]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref212) Remy et al. 2019

[[213]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref213) Malewitz, J. & J. McCollough. 2015. Blood Lessons: Ten
years after a fiery explosion killed 15 in Texas City, preventable deaths
continue at refineries.  _Texas Tribune_ , March 22.
<https://apps.texastribune.org/blood-lessons/>

[[214]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref214) McQuiston et al. 2013.  _A Risk Too Great: Hydrofluoric
Acid in U.S. Refineries_. Tony Mazzochi Center, New Perspectives Consulting
Group, United Steelworkers. <http://assets.usw.org/resources/hse/pdf/A-Risk-
Too-Great.pdf>

[[215]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref215) Buhl, L. 2018. Activists and Oil Refiners Square Off Over
Hydrofluoric Acid.  _Undark_ , October 10.
<https://undark.org/2018/10/10/hydrofluoric-acid-oil-refining-explosion/>

[[216]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref216) Sierra Club. 2020. Houston Community Continues Fight
Against Valero For Polluting Air With Hydrogen Cyanide. August 28.
<https://www.sierraclub.org/texas/blog/2020/08/houston-community-continues-
fight-against-valero-for-polluting-air-hydrogen>

[[217]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref217) Kunstman et al. 2020.  _Monitoring for Benzene at Refinery
Fencelines: 10 Oil Refineries Across U.S. Emitted Cancer-Causing Benzene Above
EPA Action Level_. Environmental Integrity Project, February.
<https://environmentalintegrity.org/news/refineries-emit-benzene-in-amounts-
above-epa-action-levels/>

[[218]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref218) McLaughlin et al. 2020. Special Report: U.S. air monitors
routinely miss pollution – even refinery explosions.  _Reuters_ , December 1.
<https://www.reuters.com/article/idUSL1N2IG21I>

[[219]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref219) Fleischman & Franklin 2017.

[[220]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref220) Auchincloss et al. 2019. Statement on the Health Effects
of Refineries and Implications for the S Philadelphia Refinery.
<https://www.phila.gov/media/20191204161537/Auchincloss-et-al-Statement-on-
the-Health-Effects-of-Refineries-and-Implications-for-S-Phila-Refinery.pdf>

[[221]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref221) Fleischman et al. 2016.  _Fossil Fumes: A public health
analysis of toxic air pollution from the oil and gas industry_. Clean Air Task
Force, June. <https://www.catf.us/resource/fossil-fumes-public-health-
analysis/>

[[222]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref222) Fleischman et al. 2016b.  _Gasping for Breath: An analysis
of the health effects from ozone pollution from the oil and gas industry_.
Clean Air Task Force, August. <https://www.catf.us/resource/gasping-for-
breath/>

[[223]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref223) Graham et al. 2017.  _Health Risks in US States from Oil
and Gas Air Pollution_. Clean Air Task Force, February.
<https://www.catf.us/resource/health-risks-in-us-states-from-oil-and-gas-air-
pollution/>

[[224]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref224) See also Oil and Gas Threat Map 2.0.
<https://oilandgasthreatmap.com/>

[[225]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref225) Bouwes et al. 2003. Information for Empowerment: The EPA’s
Risk-Screening Environmental Indicators Project. In Boyce & Shelley, eds.,
_Natural Assets: Democratizing Environmental Ownership_. Washington, DC:
Island Press.
[https://books.google.com/books?hl=en&lr=&id=7SsN1vC8X5wC](https://books.google.com/books?hl=en&lr=&id=7SsN1vC8X5wC)

[[226]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref226) The term “minority” here refers to the collective group of
racial and ethnic minorities in the United States, although in many regions
this group constitutes a plurality or a majority of residents. The category
includes anyone who does not identify as non-Hispanic White.

[[227]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref227) Political Economy Research Institute (PERI). 2021. Top 100
Polluter Indexes. <https://www.peri.umass.edu/top-100-polluter-indexes>

[[228]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref228) Donaghy 2021

[[229]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref229) Ash et al. 2009. Tables 5 & 6.

[[230]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref230) PERI 2021

[[231]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref231) Fleischman & Franklin 2017.

[[232]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref232) White et al. 2016.  _Double Jeopardy in Houston: Acute and
Chronic Chemical Exposures Pose Disproportionate Risks for Marginalized
Communities_. Union of Concerned Scientists & t.e.j.a.s., October.
<https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/attach/2016/10/ucs-double-
jeopardy-in-houston-full-report-2016.pdf>

[[233]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref233) Greenpeace. 2019. Throwing Away The Future: How Companies
Still Have It Wrong on Plastic Pollution ‘Solutions.’ September.
<https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/research/how-companies-still-have-it-
wrong-on-plastic-pollution-solutions/>

[[234]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref234) Mitchell, D. 2019. For massive new plants, Formosa wants
OK to double amount of chemicals released into St. James Parish air.  _The
Advocate_ , July 8.
<https://www.theadvocate.com/baton_rouge/news/article_c30d4620-a1be-11e9-837c-13f09466bb79.html>

[[235]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref235) U.S. EPA. National Air Toxics Assessment. 2014 NATA Map.
<https://www.epa.gov/national-air-toxics-assessment/2014-nata-map>

[[236]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref236) Carpenter & Wagner. 2019. Environmental justice in the oil
refinery industry: A panel analysis across United States counties.
_Ecological Economics,_ 159, 101-109.
<https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S092180091830586X>

[[237]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref237) Lynch et al. 2004. Determinants of Environmental Law
Violation Fines Against Petroleum Refineries: Race, Ethnicity, Income, and
Aggregation Effects.  _Soc. & Nat. Res._, 17, 4, 333-347.
<https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/08941920490278782>

[[238]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref238) James et al. 2012. Uneven Magnitude of Disparities in
Cancer Risks from Air Toxics.  _Int J Environ Res Public Health_ , 9, 12,
4365–4385 <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3546767/>

[[239]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref239) Grineski & Collins. 2018. Geographic and social
disparities in exposure to air neurotoxicants at U.S. public schools.  _Env.
Research_ , 161, 580-587
<https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0013935117317188>

[[240]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref240) U.S. Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety
Administration. Petroleum Pipeline Systems.
<https://primis.phmsa.dot.gov/comm/PetroleumPipelineSystems.htm?nocache=9697>

[[241]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref241) Donaghy, T. & K. Stewart. 2017.  _Four Proposed Tar Sands
Oil Pipelines Pose A Threat To Water Resources_. Greenpeace USA.
<https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/research/four-proposed-tar-sands-oil-
pipelines-pose-a-threat-to-water-resources/>

[[242]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref242) International Tanker Owners Pollution Federation (ITOPF).
Oil Tanker Spill Statistics 2020. <https://www.itopf.org/knowledge-
resources/data-statistics/statistics/>

[[243]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref243) Margolis, J. 2015.  _Runaway Risks: Oil Trains and the
Government’s Failure to Protect People, Wildlife and the Environment_. Center
for Biological Diversity, February.
<https://www.biologicaldiversity.org/campaigns/oil_trains/pdfs/runaway_risks_web.pdf>

[[244]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref244) Jaffe et al. 2015. Diesel particulate matter and coal dust
from trains in the Columbia River Gorge, Washington State, USA.  _Atmospheric
Pollution Research_. 6, 6, 946-952.
<https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S1309104215000057>

[[245]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref245) Johnson et al. 2014. Air quality and health issues along
Houston’s Ship Channel: An exploratory environmental justice analysis of a
vulnerable community (Pleasantville).  _Race, Gender & Class_, 21, 3/4,
273–303. <https://www.jstor.org/stable/43496996?seq=1>

[[246]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref246) Donaghy 2021

[[247]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref247) Thorbecke, C. 2016. Why a Previously Proposed Route for
the Dakota Access Pipeline Was Rejected.  _ABC News_ , November 3.
<https://abcnews.go.com/US/previously-proposed-route-dakota-access-pipeline-
rejected/story?id=43274356>

[[248]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref248) Wraight et al. 2018.  _Environmental Justice Concerns and
the Proposed Atlantic Coast Pipeline Route in North Carolina_. RTI Press
Publication No. MR-0037-1803. Research Triangle Park, NC.
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK556154/>

[[249]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref249) Strube et al. 2021. Proposed Pipelines and Environmental
Justice: Exploring the Association between Race, Socioeconomic Status, and
Pipeline Proposals in the United States.  _Rural Sociology_ , in press.
<https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/ruso.12367>

[[250]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref250) Farrow et al. 2020.

[[251]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref251) Vohra et al. 2021

[[252]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref252) Verma et al. 2016. Toxic Pollutants from Plastic Waste- A
Review.  _Procedia Env. Sci_., 35, 701-708.
<https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S187802961630158X>

[[253]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref253) Mikati et al. 2018

[[254]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref254) Tessum et al. 2018. Inequity in consumption of goods and
services adds to racial–ethnic disparities in air pollution exposure.  _PNAS_
, 116, 13, 6001-6006. <https://www.pnas.org/content/116/13/6001>

[[255]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref255) Kadaba, D. 2017. Nothing to Wheeze At: Air Pollution’s
Disproportionate Effect on Poor and Minority Communities.  _Revelator_ ,
December 15. <https://therevelator.org/air-pollution-poor-minority-
communities/>

[[256]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref256) Zhang et al. 2018

[[257]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref257) Clay & Muller. 2019. Recent Increases in Air Pollution:
Evidence and Implications for Mortality. NBER Working Paper 26381.
<https://www.nber.org/papers/w26381>

[[258]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref258) Colmer et al. 2020. Disparities in PM2.5 air pollution in
the United States.  _Science_ , 369, 6503, 575-578.
<https://science.sciencemag.org/content/369/6503/575>

[[259]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref259) Miranda et al. 2011. Making the Environmental Justice
Grade: The Relative Burden of Air Pollution Exposure in the United States.
_Int J Environ Res Public Health_ , 8, 6, 1755–1771.
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3137995/>

[[260]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref260) Quintero et al. 2011.  _U.S. Latinos and Air Pollution: A
Call to Action_. NRDC, September.
<https://www.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/LatinoAirReport.pdf>

[[261]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref261) Donaghy 2021

[[262]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref262) Rissman et al. 2020. Technologies and policies to
decarbonize global industry: Review and assessment of mitigation drivers
through 2070.  _Applied Energy_ , 266, 114848.
<https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306261920303603>

[[263]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref263) National Research Council. 2010.  _Hidden costs of energy:
Unpriced consequences of energy production and use_. Washington DC: The
National Academies Press.
[http://www.nap.edu/catalog/12794/](http://www.nap.edu/catalog/12794/hidden-
costs-of-energy-unpriced-consequences-of-energy-production-and)

[[264]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref264) Machol & Rizk. 2013. Economic value of U.S. fossil fuel
electricity health impacts.  _Environ. Int_., 52, 75-80.
<https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23246069/>

[[265]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref265) Epstein et al. 2011

[[266]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref266) U.S. EPA. Cleaner Power Plants.
<https://www.epa.gov/mats/cleaner-power-plants>

[[267]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref267) Gaffney, A. 2020. A Legacy of Contamination: How the
Kingston coal ash spill unearthed a nuclear nightmare.  _Grist_ , December 15.
<https://grist.org/justice/tva-kingston-coal-ash-spill-nuclear/>

[[268]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref268) U.S. EPA. 2015. Regulatory Impact Analysis for the Clean
Power Plan Final Rule.
<https://19january2017snapshot.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2015-08/documents/cpp-
final-rule-ria.pdf>

[[269]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref269) U.S. EPA. 2015. Fact Sheet: Clean Power Plan By The
Numbers. <https://19january2017snapshot.epa.gov/cleanpowerplan/fact-sheet-
clean-power-plan-numbers_.html>

[[270]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref270) Irfan, U. 2021. A federal court just struck down Trump’s
attempt to make power plants even dirtier.  _Vox_ , January 19.
<https://www.vox.com/2021/1/19/22239074/affordable-clean-energy-rule-vacated-
trump-court-climate-change-obama-biden>

[[271]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref271) Casey et al. 2018

[[272]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref272) Casey et al. 2020. Improved asthma outcomes observed in
the vicinity of coal power plant retirement, retrofit and conversion to
natural gas.  _Nature Energy_ , 5, 398–408.
<https://www.nature.com/articles/s41560-020-0600-2>

[[273]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref273) Strasert et al. 2019. Air quality and health benefits from
potential coal power plant closures in Texas.  _J. Air & Waste Manage_. 69,
333–350. <https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30339492/>

[[274]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref274) Perera et al. 2020. Co-Benefits to Children’s Health of
the U.S. Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative.  _Environmental Health
Perspectives_ , 128, 7. <https://ehp.niehs.nih.gov/doi/full/10.1289/EHP6706>

[[275]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref275) Diana, Ash & Boyce 2021.

[[276]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref276) Specht, M. 2018. No, Natural Gas Power Plants Are Not
Clean. Union of Concerned Scientists, November 9.
<https://blog.ucsusa.org/mark-specht/natural-gas-power-plants-are-not-clean>

[[277]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref277) Wilson et al. 2012.  _Coal Blooded: Putting Profits Before
People_. NAACP, Indigeneous Environmental Network & Little Village
Environmental Justice Organization. <https://www.naacp.org/wp-
content/uploads/2016/04/CoalBlooded.pdf>

[[278]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref278) U.S. EPA. 2015. EJScreening Report for the Clean Power
Plan.
<https://archive.epa.gov/epa/sites/production/files/2016-04/documents/ejscreencpp.pdf>

[[279]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref279) Massetti et al. 2017.  _Environmental Quality and the U.S.
Power Sector: Air Quality, Water Quality, Land Use and Environmental Justice_.
ORNL/SPR-2016/772.
<https://info.ornl.gov/sites/publications/files/Pub60561.pdf>

[[280]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref280) PSE Healthy Energy. 2017.  _Natural gas power plants in
California’s disadvantaged communities_. April.
<https://www.psehealthyenergy.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/04/CA.EJ_.Gas_.Plants.pdf>

[[281]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref281) Food & Water Watch. 2018.  _Pernicious Placement of
Pennsylvania Power Plants_. June.
<https://www.foodandwaterwatch.org/insight/pernicious-placement-pennsylvania-
power-plants>

[[282]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref282) Richmond-Bryant et al. 2020

[[283]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref283) Diana, Ash & Boyce 2021.

[[284]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref284) U.S. EPA. How Mobile Source Pollution Affects Your Health.
<https://www.epa.gov/mobile-source-pollution/how-mobile-source-pollution-
affects-your-health>

[[285]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref285) Adar & Kaufman. 2007. Cardiovascular disease and air
pollutants: evaluating and improving epidemiological data implicating traffic
exposure.  _Inhal. Toxicol_., 19 Suppl 1, 135-49.
<https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17886061/>

[[286]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref286) HEI Panel on the Health Effects of Air Pollution. 2010.
_Traffic-related air pollution: a critical review of the literature on
emissions, exposure, and health effects_. January.
<https://www.healtheffects.org/publication/traffic-related-air-pollution-
critical-review-literature-emissions-exposure-and-health>

[[287]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref287) U.S. EPA. 2012.  _Regulatory Impact Analysis: Final
Rulemaking for 2017-2025 Light-Duty Vehicle Greenhouse Gas Emission Standards
and Corporate Average Fuel Economy Standards_. Pp. 6-13 to 6-14, and 6-73 to
6-76. <https://nepis.epa.gov/Exe/ZyPDF.cgi/P100EZI1.PDF?Dockey=P100EZI1.PDF>

[[288]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref288) Houser, T. et al. 2018. The Biggest Climate Rollback Yet?
_Rhodium Group_ , August 2. <https://rhg.com/research/the-biggest-climate-
rollback-yet/>

[[289]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref289) Wimberger, E. & H. Pitt. 2019. Come and Take It: Revoking
the California Waiver.  _Rhodium Group_ , October 28.
<https://rhg.com/research/come-and-take-it-revoking-the-california-waiver/>

[[290]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref290) Environmental Defense Fund. 2018. Comments submitted on
the Proposed Rule: The Safer Affordable Fuel-Efficient (SAFE) Vehicles Rule
for Model Years 2021–2026 Passenger Cars and Light Trucks. November 4.
<https://www.regulations.gov/document?D=EPA-HQ-OAR-2018-0283-5775>.

[[291]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref291) E.g. Johnson, M. 2017. Undoing Oakland’s History of
Environmental Racism as We Address Climate Change in California.  _Greenlining
Institute_ , May 12. <https://greenlining.org/blog-category/2017/undoing-
oaklands-history-environmental-racism/>

[[292]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref292) See e.g. Stromberg, J. 2016. Highways gutted American
cities. So why did they build them?  _Vox_ , May 11.
<https://www.vox.com/2015/5/14/8605917/highways-interstate-cities-history>

[[293]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref293) Nardone et al. 2020

[[294]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref294) Hoffman et al. 2020

[[295]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref295) Mielke et al. 2010. Lead (Pb) legacy from vehicle traffic
in eight California urbanized areas: Continuing influence of lead dust on
children’s health.  _Sci. Tot. Environ_., 408, 19, 3965-3975.
<https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0048969710004900>

[[296]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref296) Rowangould 2013

[[297]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref297) Park & Kwan. 2020. Understanding Racial Disparities in
Exposure to Traffic-Related Air Pollution: Considering the Spatiotemporal
Dynamics of Population Distribution.  _Int J Environ Res Public Health_ , 17,
3, 908. <https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32024171/>

[[298]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref298) Tayarani & Rowangould. 2020. Estimating exposure to fine
particulate matter emissions from vehicle traffic: Exposure misclassification
and daily activity patterns in a large, sprawling region.  _Env. Research_ ,
182, 108999.
<https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0013935119307960>

[[299]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref299) Lena et al. 2002. Elemental carbon and PM2.5 levels in an
urban community heavily impacted by truck traffic.  _Environmental Health
Perspectives,_ 110, 1009-1015.
<https://ehp.niehs.nih.gov/doi/abs/10.1289/ehp.021101009>

[[300]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref300) Wier et al. 2009. Health, traffic, and environmental
justice: collaborative research and community action in San Francisco,
California.  _American Journal of Public Health,_ 99, S499-S504.
<https://ajph.aphapublications.org/doi/full/10.2105/AJPH.2008.148916>

[[301]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref301) Houston et al. 2014. Disparities in Exposure to Automobile
and Truck Traffic and Vehicle Emissions Near the Los Angeles–Long Beach Port
Complex.  _American Journal of Public Health_. 104, 1, 156–164.
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3910024/>

[[302]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref302) Watts et al. 2020. The 2020 report of The  _Lancet_
Countdown on health and climate change: responding to converging crises.
_Lancet_ , 397, 10269, P129-170.
<https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(20)32290-X/fulltext>

[[303]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref303) Salas et al. 2020. 2020  _Lancet_ Countdown on Health and
Climate Change Policy Brief for the United States of America.  _Lancet,_
December. <http://www.lancetcountdownus.org/wp-
content/uploads/2020/12/FINAL-2020_12_02_Lancet-Countdown-Policy-Document-USA-
ENG.pdf>

[[304]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref304) Watts et al. 2020

[[305]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref305) Rojas et al. 2019. Emergence of robust precipitation
changes across crop production areas in the 21st century. PNAS, 116, 14,
6673-6678. https://www.pnas.org/content/116/14/6673

[[306]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref306) IPBES. 2019. Summary for policymakers of the global
assessment report on biodiversity and ecosystem services of the
Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem
Services. Diaz et al. eds. https://www.ipbes.net/global-assessment

[[307]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref307) Ebi et al. 2018. Chapter 14: Human Health. In  _Impacts,
Risks, and Adaptation in the United States: Fourth National Climate
Assessment_ , Volume II, Reidmiller et al., eds. U.S. Global Change Research
Program. <https://nca2018.globalchange.gov/chapter/14/>

[[308]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref308) Martinich, J. & A. Crimmins. 2019. Climate damages and
adaptation potential across diverse sectors of the United States.  _Nature
Climate Change_ , 9, 397–404.
<https://www.nature.com/articles/s41558-019-0444-6>

[[309]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref309) Burke, M. & S. Heft-Neel. 2020. Indirect mortality from
recent wildfires in CA. <http://www.g-feed.com/2020/09/indirect-mortality-
from-recent.html>

[[310]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref310) Climate Attribution Database.
<https://climateattribution.org/>

[[311]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref311) U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA). Billion-Dollar Weather and Climate Disasters: Overview.
<https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/billions/>

[[312]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref312) Im et al. 2017. Deadly heat waves projected in the densely
populated agricultural regions of South Asia. Science Advances, 3, 8,
e1603322. <https://advances.sciencemag.org/content/3/8/e1603322>

[[313]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref313) Ebi et al. 2018

[[314]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref314) Hsiang et al. 2017. Estimating economic damage from
climate change in the United States.  _Science_ , 356, 6345, 1362-1369.
<https://science.sciencemag.org/content/356/6345/1362>

[[315]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref315) Alston, P. 2019. Climate change and poverty : report of
the Special Rapporteur on Extreme Poverty and Human Rights. United Nations
Human Rights Council, July.
<https://digitallibrary.un.org/record/3810720?ln=en>

[[316]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref316) Associated Press. 2017. Poor, Southern counties are most
at risk. <https://interactives.ap.org/climate-change-economic-damage/>

[[317]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref317) Sager, L. 2019. Income inequality and carbon consumption:
Evidence from Environmental Engel curves. Energy Economics, 84, 1, 104507.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0140988319302968

[[318]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref318) Rudolph et al. 2018.  _Climate Change, Health, and Equity:
A Guide for Local Health Departments_. Oakland, CA and Washington D.C.: Public
Health Institute and American Public Health Association.
<https://www.apha.org/topics-and-issues/climate-change/guide>

[[319]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref319) U.S. Climate Resilience Toolkit. Relocating Kivalina.
<https://toolkit.climate.gov/case-studies/relocating-kivalina>

[[320]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref320) Davenport, C. & C. Robertson. 2016. Resettling the First
American ‘Climate Refugees.  _New York Times_ , May 3.
<https://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/03/us/resettling-the-first-american-climate-
refugees.html>

[[321]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref321) Garcia-Lopez, G. 2018.The multiple layers of environmental
injustice in contexts of (un)natural disasters: the case of Puerto Rico post-
Hurricane Maria.  _Environmental Justice_ , 11, 3, 101-108.
<https://www.liebertpub.com/doi/10.1089/env.2017.0045>

[[322]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref322) Kiaghadi & Riafi. 2019. Physical, Chemical, and Microbial
Quality of Floodwaters in Houston Following Hurricane Harvey.  _Environ. Sci.
Technol._ , 53, 9, 4832–4840.
<https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.est.9b00792>

[[323]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref323) Subramanian et al. 2018. Air Quality in Puerto Rico in the
Aftermath of Hurricane Maria: A Case Study on the Use of Lower Cost Air
Quality Monitors.  _ACS Earth Space Chem_., 2, 11, 1179–1186.
<https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsearthspacechem.8b00079>

[[324]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref324) Horney et al. 2018. Comparing residential contamination in
a Houston environmental justice neighborhood before and after Hurricane
Harvey.  _PLoS One_ , 13, 2, e0192660
<https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0192660>

[[325]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref325) Lancet Countdown. 2020. Case Study: Compounding Crises of
Our Time During Hurricane Laura: Climate Change, COVID-19, and Environmental
Injustice. <http://www.lancetcountdownus.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/12/cs-
compounding.pdf>

[[326]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref326) Chakraborty et al. 2019. Disproportionately higher
exposure to urban heat in lower-income neighborhoods: a multi-city
perspective.  _Environ. Res. Lett.,_ 14, 105003.
<https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1748-9326/ab3b99>

[[327]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref327) Hsu et al. 2020. Disproportionate Exposure to Urban Heat
Island Across Major U.S. Cities.  _SSRN_. <https://ssrn.com/abstract=3684952>

[[328]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref328) Benz, S. & J. Burney. 2021. Widespread Race and Class
Disparities in Surface Urban Heat Extremes Across the United States. OSF
Preprints. <https://osf.io/r5svd>

[[329]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref329) Hoffman et al. 2020

[[330]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref330) Katz, L. 2021. A Racist Past, a Flooded Future: Formerly
Redlined Areas Have $107 Billion Worth of Homes Facing High Flood Risk—25%
More Than Non-Redlined Areas.  _Redfin_ , March 14.
<https://www.redfin.com/news/redlining-flood-risk/>

[[331]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref331) Bekkar et al. 2020

[[332]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref332) Schleeter, R., A. Moas & T. Donaghy. 2020.  _Greenpeace
USA’s Just Recovery Agenda: A pathway to a new economy_. Greenpeace USA,
November. <https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/just-recovery-agenda/>

[[333]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref333) Demos. 2020.  _Frontlines climate justice executive action
platform_. July. <https://www.demos.org/policy-briefs/frontlines-climate-
justice-executive-action-platform>

[[334]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref334) Evergreen & Demos. 2020.  _Designing a New National Equity
Mapping Program_. October. <https://www.demos.org/policy-briefs/designing-new-
national-equity-mapping-program>

[[335]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref335) 116th Congress. 2020. Environmental Justice for All Act.
H.R.5986. <https://www.congress.gov/bill/116th-congress/house-bill/5986>;
S.4401. <https://www.congress.gov/bill/116th-congress/senate-bill/4401>

[[336]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref336) 116th Congress. 2020. Climate Equity Act of 2020.
H.R.8019. <https://www.congress.gov/bill/116th-congress/house-bill/8019>;
S.4513. <https://www.congress.gov/bill/116th-congress/senate-bill/4513>

[[337]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref337) 116th Congress. 2020. End Polluter Welfare Act of 2020.
H.R.7781. <https://www.congress.gov/bill/116th-congress/house-bill/7781>

[[338]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref338) Donaghy, T., J. Noël & L. Stockman. 2020.  _Policy
briefing: Carbon impacts of reinstating the U.S. crude export ban_. Greenpeace
USA & Oil Change International, January.
<https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/carbon-impacts-of-reinstating-
the-us-crude-export-ban/>

[[339]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref339) Last Chance Alliance. 2019. Our last chance: Phasing out
fossil fuels. California Oil & Gas Policy Brief.
<https://lastchancealliance.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/California-Oil-and-
Gas-Policy-Brief-Last-Chance-Alliance.pdf>

[[340]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref340) Donaghy, T. 2020. Remediation of orphan oil & gas wells in
COVID-19 stimulus. Greenpeace USA, April.
<https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/research/policy-briefing-remediation-of-
orphan-oil-gas-wells-in-covid-19-stimulus/>

[[341]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref341) Jiang, C. 2020. Protecting energy workers and communities
in a just COVID-19 recovery. Greenpeace USA, April.
<https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/research/policy-briefing-protecting-
energy-workers-and-communities-in-a-just-covid-19-recovery/>

[[342]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref342) THRIVE Agenda. A bold plan for economic renewal: Creating
millions of jobs for a just, healthy, and equitable society.
<https://www.thriveagenda.com/>

[[343]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref343) 117th Congress. 2021. For the People Act of 2021. H.R.1.
<https://www.congress.gov/bill/117th-congress/house-bill/1>

[[344]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref344) 116th Congress. 2020. Voting Rights Advancement Act of
2019. H.R.4. <https://www.congress.gov/bill/116th-congress/house-bill/4>

[[345]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref345) 117th Congress. 2021. Washington, D.C. Admission Act.
H.R.51. <https://www.congress.gov/bill/117th-congress/house-bill/51>

[[346]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref346) 116th Congress. 2019. Democracy for All Amendment.
H.J.Res.2. <https://www.congress.gov/bill/116th-congress/house-joint-
resolution/2/text>; Harris, Kamala D. Harris, Feinstein, Senate Democrats
introduce constitutional amendment to overturn Citizens United.
<https://www.harris.senate.gov/news/press-releases/harris-feinstein-senate-
democrats-introduce-constitutional-amendment-to-overturn-citizens-united>

[[347]](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-
racism/#_ftnref347) The BREATHE Act. (n.d.). <https://breatheact.org/wp-
content/uploads/2020/07/The-BREATHE-Act-PDF_FINAL3-1.pdf>

