# Tar Sands Pipelines Are Heavily Financed by 26 Key Banks

Twenty-six banks are the primary sources of credit for the companies building
three pipelines aiming to move Canada’s tar sands to market. Greenpeace is
releasing research showing the connections between these banks and the
pipelines that could facilitate the expansion of one of the world’s dirtiest
energy sources.

Twenty-six key banks are lending money to the companies building the following
tar sands pipelines:

  * TransCanada’s proposed Keystone XL pipeline
  * Enbridge’s proposed replacement and expansion of the existing Line 3 pipeline
  * Kinder Morgan’s proposed expansion of the existing Trans Mountain pipeline
  * [A fourth proposed pipeline, TransCanada’s Energy East project, was [recently cancelled](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/news/greenpeace-reacts-cancellation-controversial-east-energy-pipeline/).]

All three pipelines begin in Alberta’s tar sands producing region and seek to
transport that crude oil south to refineries on the U.S. Gulf Coast, or east
and west to coastal shipping terminals. The land-locked tar sands are
currently hamstrung by a lack of pipeline capacity, and the construction of
these three pipes could lead to their expansion — with dire consequences for
communities along their path, and the global climate. [If you need a refresher
on some of the technical terms used here, read our [Finance 101
summary](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/research/fossil-fuel-financing-101/).]

Data collected from the Bloomberg Business Terminal (current as of October 18,
2017) shows that these three pipeline companies — TransCanada, Enbridge and
Kinder Morgan — receive billions of dollars of financing via a number of term
loans and revolving credit facilities. All of the following credit facilities
are for general corporate finance, except one project loan organized
specifically to finance Kinder Morgan’s Trans Mountain pipeline.

**TransCanada**(total credit $5.72 billion)

  * $1 billion revolving credit, maturity date December 15, 2017, lead agent JPMorgan Chase
  * $500 million revolving credit, maturity date December 15, 2017, lead agent JPMorgan Chase
  * $2 billion revolving credit, maturity date December 15, 2018, lead agent Bank of Montreal
  * $2.22 billion revolving credit, maturity date December 16, 2021, lead agent Bank of Montreal

**Kinder Morgan** (total credit $10.07 billion)

  * $1 billion term loan, maturity date January 26, 2019, lead agent Barclays
  * $5 billion revolving credit, maturity date November 26, 2019, lead agent Barclays
  * $4.07 billion revolving credit, maturity date June 16, 2022 (for three tranches), lead agent Royal Bank of Canada. This credit facility is a **project loan** specifically to finance the Trans Mountain pipeline.

**Enbridge** (total credit $12.24 billion)

  * $625 million revolving credit, maturity date June 29, 2018, lead agent JPMorgan Chase
  * $950 million revolving credit, maturity date July 27, 2018, lead agent Royal Bank of Canada
  * $2.22 billion revolving credit, maturity date July 29, 2018, lead agent Bank of Nova Scotia
  * $1.3 billion revolving credit, maturity dates August 3, 2018 and 2019 (for two separate tranches), lead agent Toronto Dominion Bank
  * $650 million term loan, maturity date May 19, 2019, lead agent BNP Paribas
  * $300 million term loan, maturity date May 19, 2019, lead agent Bank of Tokyo – Mitsubishi UFJ
  * $1.26 billion revolving credit, maturity date July 26, 2019, lead agent Toronto Dominion Bank
  * $1.11 billion revolving credit, maturity date August 3, 2019, lead agent Bank of Montreal
  * $2 billion revolving credit, maturity dates September 26, 2019 and 2020 (for two separate tranches), lead agent Bank of America
  * $1.83 billion revolving credit, maturity date August 3, 2020, lead agent Toronto Dominion Bank

[Note: A term loan is for a specified amount, interest rate, and repayment
schedule, whereas a revolving line of credit makes funds available up to a
maximum amount and can fluctuate month-to-month as funds are drawn down and
repaid. Maturity dates indicate when the credit must be repaid or renewed.]

Numerous banks contribute money to these 17 credit facilities and the lead
agent bank is responsible for organizing those lenders, performing due
diligence on the terms of the loan, and doing the paperwork to finalize the
deal. For this analysis, we excluded loans specifically used for acquisitions
and loans to subsidiaries that specialize in natural gas pipelines. For most
loans, it was not made public how much each bank is lending to each credit
facility, so it is not possible to report total tar sands financing amounts
for each bank. We have identified the top 26 banks who are most active in tar
sands finance, either acting as a lead agent or participating in 4 or more of
the 17 loans. Twenty of these banks (denoted with an asterisk *) are financing
all four tar sands pipelines.

These 26 banks include five U.S. banks:

  * JPMorgan Chase (headquartered in New York City, NY)*
  * Wells Fargo (San Francisco, CA)*
  * Bank of America / Merrill Lynch (Charlotte, NC)*
  * Citibank (New York City, NY)*
  * Morgan Stanley (New York City, NY)

Nine Canadian banks:

  * Royal Bank of Canada (headquartered in Toronto)*
  * Bank of Nova Scotia / Scotiabank (Toronto)*
  * Toronto Dominion / TD Bank (Toronto)*
  * Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce / CIBC (Toronto)*
  * Bank of Montreal (Montreal)*
  * National Bank of Canada (Montreal)*
  * Export Development Canada (Ottawa)
  * Caisse centrale desjardins (Lévis)*
  * Alberta Treasury Branches (Edmonton)*

And twelve other banks from around the world:

  * Deutsche Bank (headquartered in Frankfurt, Germany)*
  * Barclays (London, UK)*
  * HSBC Bank (London, Hong Kong)*
  * Bank of Tokyo Mitsubishi UFJ / MUFG (Tokyo, Japan)*
  * Mizuho Bank (Tokyo, Japan)*
  * Credit Suisse (Zurich, Switzerland)*
  * BNP Paribas (Paris, France)
  * Credit Agricole (Montrouge, France)*
  * Sumitomo Mitsui Bank / SMBC (Tokyo, Japan)*
  * DNB Capital / ASA (Oslo, Norway)
  * Societe Generale (Paris, France)
  * Bank of China (Beijing, China)

[Other banks who have participated in at least one tar sands credit facility
are the following: UBS, SunTrust, Natixis, ING Bank, BBVA Compass, Regions
Bank, US Bank, Branch Banking & Trust, Bank Hapoalim B.M., United Overseas
Bank Ltd., China Construction Bank, China Merchants Bank, Huntington National
Bank, Industrial and Commercial Bank of China, State Bank of India, Canadian
Western Bank, FIPPGV/PX (Investments) Ltd., and Siemens.]

Sixteen of the loans described here are for “general corporate purposes” and
these companies may seek out additional forms of financing to move forward
with these pipelines. For example, banks may raise money by issuing bonds or
by offering equity, as Kinder Morgan has done with its Trans Mountain Initial
Public Offering (IPO). The pipeline companies may also seek out “project
loans” to help finance the construction of these specific pipelines (as Kinder
Morgan has done, and as Energy Transfer Partners did with the Dakota Access
Pipeline).

We will periodically update this information.

