# Greenpeace Analyzes the Lewis Powell Memo: Corporate Blueprint to Dominate Democracy

Forty years ago, not only was Greenpeace formed, but a then-obscure corporate
lawyer (later appointed by President Nixon to the Supreme Court) drafted a
memorandum for the U.S. Chamber of Commerce that forever changed the influence
of big business on our political and cultural landscape.

As part of our investigation of the history and subsequent consequences of
[Lewis Powell’s Memorandum](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/democracy/the-
lewis-powell-memo-a-corporate-blueprint-to-dominate-democracy/) for the
Chamber, Greenpeace has compiled a series of references and related analysis
that trace specific corporate activities to the overall strategy that Powell
sketched out in his memo.

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/5497c42a-us_supreme_court_justice_lewis_powell_-_1976_official_portrait-1-788x1024.jpg)

In four inter-related pages, we describe how the Chamber and other leading
members of Corporate America targeted specific public areas for increased
influence, if not outright takeover:

### [Politics](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/democracy/powell-memo-blueprint-
impact-on-political-action/)

With particular focus on the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, Lewis Powell advocated
that corporations take a much more aggressive and direct role in politics.
Since Powell’s day corporate lobbying expenditures and donations to
politicians have exploded in size and relative importance, pulling elected
officials away from various public interests towards the enduring priorities
of big business.

### [Judicial and Legal
System](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/democracy/powell-memo-blueprint-impact-
on-judicial-and-legal-action/)

Powell identified the judiciary as one of the most important arenas for
business activism. His suggestions led to the swift formation of dozens of
corporate-funded legal foundations, many of which succeeded in using strategic
litigation and distorted constitutional doctrines to overturn regulations on
public health and the environment. The U.S. Chamber and its allies in
particular have waged a multi-decade attack on the rights of victims of
corporate crime and abuse. Perhaps the most infamous example of how corporate
power has been advanced through the strategies seeded by Powell is last year’s
Supreme Court decision in _Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission_ ,
which opened the floodgates to unlimited corporate contributions to influence
elections.

### [Mass Media and
Communications](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/democracy/powell-memo-
blueprint-impact-on-mass-media-and-communications/)

Lewis Powell encouraged corporations to leverage their ownership and
advertising power to influence mass media. Recent decades have seen massive
consolidation of mainstream media, resulting not only in the decline of
independent and investigative journalism, but a clear pro-corporate news bias.

### [Schools and Education](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/democracy/powell-
memo-blueprint-impact-on-schools-and-education/)

One of the most important themes of the Powell Memo was for corporate America
to invest in a long-term effort to influence educational curricula and reduce
their most outspoken critics’ influence on campus. Corporations have since
used a variety of means to influence university research and campus culture.

Greenpeace has dealt increasingly with the growing corporate-oriented
framework that was created in part by the suggestions of Lewis Powell. A broad
network of corporate think tanks, trade associations and legal foundations
that has rapidly expanded since the 1970s is at the heart of the [climate
science denial
movement](https://www.greenpeace.org/international/en/publications/reports/dealing-
in-doubt/), funded by the likes of [Koch
Industries](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/en/campaigns/global-warming-and-
energy/polluterwatch/koch-industries/) and ExxonMobil.

Numerous other examples exist of industries harnessing the power of their
money and public relations resources to trample scientific integrity and
environmental or public health protections. [Chemical
companies](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/en/campaigns/toxics/toxic-chemical-
threats/) avoid responsibility for looming disasters and are even willing to
[spy on opponents](http://www.spygate.org) in order to avoid accountability.
Familiar [tuna brands](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/en/news-and-
blogs/campaign-blog/the-video-that-starkist-bumble-bee-and-chicke/blog/36388/)
turn a blind eye to their role in [destructive fishing
practices](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/en/campaigns/oceans/seafood/tuna/).
The nuclear industry continues to push for false solutions to climate change
even as Japan continues to struggle with a [nuclear
disaster](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/en/campaigns/nuclear/Fukushima-
nuclear-disaster/). Dirty U.S. coal companies threaten the health of residents
in [frontline communities](http://quitcoal.org/) andfuel [global climate
disruption](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/en/campaigns/global-warming-and-
energy/). And global warming is further intensified by U.S. companies that
drive [deforestation](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/en/campaigns/forests/)
operations around the world.

One wonders if corporations have already crossed a line in dominating the key
institutions so crucial to a robust democracy that even _Lewis Powell_ would
have been alarmed.

For more on the Powell Memo, check out our previous blog ([Corporate Blueprint
to Dominate Democracy](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/en/news-and-
blogs/campaign-blog/the-lewis-powell-memo-corporate-blueprint-
to-/blog/36466/)) written on the 40th anniversary of its release, and be sure
to read the [Powell Memo](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/democracy/the-lewis-
powell-memo-a-corporate-blueprint-to-dominate-democracy/) yourself.

