greenpeace.org

GREEN
ELECTRONICS
SURVEY

DECEMBER 2008

e
r
u
t
u
f

e
e
r
f
-
c

i

x
o
t

a

g
n

i
t
a
e
r
C

Green
Electronics

The search continues...

Contents

Green Electronics - The Search Continues… .......................... 3

Introduction ............................................................................. 3

The Green Electronics Survey .................................................. 4

Main findings ........................................................................... 4

Summary of results .................................................................. 6

Observations and the ways forward ......................................... 8

Designing out toxic chemicals .................................................. 9

Energy efficient products ........................................................ 10

Product lifestyle approach ...................................................... 10

Innovations and marketing ..................................................... 11

Annex 1: Methodology of scoring ........................................... 1

Use of hazardous chemical substances ................................. 12

Energy use and power-saving ................................................ 13

Product lifecycle ..................................................................... 14

Innovation and marketing ....................................................... 15

Annex : Detailed product line-up .......................................... 16

Desktops ............................................................................... 16

Notebook computers ............................................................. 18

Mobile phones ....................................................................... 20

Smart phones/PDAs .............................................................. 22

Televisions ............................................................................. 24

Computer monitors ................................................................ 26

For more information, contact:
enquiries@int.greenpeace.org

Authors: Mario Rautner and Casey Harrell

Edited by: Steve Erwood

With thanks to Iza Kruszewska, Dr. Kevin Brigden,
Yannick Vicaire and Martin Hojsik

Printed on 100% recycled post-consumer waste
with vegetable-based inks.

JN 214

Published in December 2008
by Greenpeace International
Ottho Heldringstraat 5,
1066 AZ Amsterdam,
The Netherlands
Tel: +31 20 718 2000   Fax: +31 20 718 2002
greenpeace.org

Front cover: design - Toby Cotton; original image - RafeB

Images © Robert Knoth / Greenpeace
Toxics E-Waste Documentation in Pakistan
In the Karachi district of Lyari, hundreds of workers, including teenage
children, earn their livelihoods by dismantling electronic scrap and
extracting valuable components such as copper to sell. This is an insight
into the personal cost of e-waste. Thousands of tonnes of e-waste such
as discarded PCs, mobile phones and TVs, are dumped in Africa and Asia
every year. Greenpeace research shows that some of this waste is exported
from Europe to Pakistan.

Images © Greenpeace / Kate Davison
Toxics E-Waste Documentation in Ghana
The majority of second-hand electrical goods that are exported to Ghana
from developed countries are beyond repair and are either dumped or
recycled in a crude fashion. In the yards, unprotected workers, many of
them children, dismantle computers and TVs with little more then stones in
search of metals that can be sold. The remaining plastic, cables and casing
is either burnt or simply dumped.

e
c
a
e
p
n
e
e
r
G

/

h
t
o
n
K

t
r
e
b
o
R
©

  l Greenpeace International l Green Electronics: the search continues l Results, Green Electronics Survey l December 2008

Green Electronics - The Search Continues…

Introduction

Since August 2006 Greenpeace has assessed the environmental

policies of consumer electronics companies through its “Guide to

Greener Electronics”. Initially this quarterly publication focused on

leading computer and mobile phone producers and their policies

with regards to hazardous chemicals used in their products

and the waste generated by their branded products. Since then

the Guide has evolved to include the 18 top manufacturers of

personal computers, mobile phones, televisions, and games

consoles. It now assesses their policies on toxic chemicals,

recycling, energy efficiency and climate change mitigation. These

reports have contributed towards motivating producers to take

responsibility for the environmental impacts caused by modern

consumer electronics. They have helped shape policies of many

electronics companies that now far exceed policies that were in

place in 2006 as well as legislative requirements.

As companies have made increasingly stronger commitments

to eliminate toxic chemicals, increase their products’ energy

efficiency and improve their recycling efforts by embracing

financial responsibility for their electronic waste, Greenpeace has

sought to comprehensively assess the state of green products

coming into the global marketplace, looking even beyond its initial

criteria in the Guide to Greener Electronics. Using information

submitted by companies in late 2007, Greenpeace published the

first edition of its Green Products Survey in early 2008. Unlike

the electronics Guide described above, which focuses on overall

corporate policies and practice, this survey evaluates the products

that the manufacturers themselves consider to be their greenest.

The first edition revealed no products that could claim the title of a

truly green product, with only a few scores barely reaching a total

score of 5 out of 10. In 2008, we invited the companies to submit

their greenest models again, to find out if new product line-ups

showed improved environmental performances, and to once again

try to find the greenest electronic products on the market.

Companies choosing to participate in the 2008 survey are:

Acer, Dell, Fujitsu Siemens, Hewlett Packard, Lenovo, LG

Electronics, Motorola, Nokia, Panasonic, RIM/Blackberry,

Sharp, Samsung, Sony, Sony Ericsson and Toshiba

i

n
o
s
v
a
D
e
t
a
K
/

e
c
a
e
p
n
e
e
r
G
©

Greenpeace International l Green Electronics: the search continues l Results, Green Electronics Survey l December 2008  l 3

Protection Agency. Points were also given for a number of

Unfortunately not all companies invited took the opportunity to

other areas such as providing detailed power consumption data

showcase the environmental performance of their products.

to consumers.

The companies that refused to take part in the survey were:

Apple, Asus, Microsoft, Nintendo, Palm and Philips

•  Product lifecycle, including criteria such as recyclability rate and

use of recycled plastic in the product. Long warranty periods and

Because Microsoft and Nintendo opted not to take part in the

good take-back programmes were also rewarded.

survey, and only Sony submitted game consoles for review, it

has not been possible to rank game consoles.

In addition to desktop and notebook computers, mobile

phones and smart phones, which were also assessed in 2007,

•  Availability of data that enables assessment of the energy taken

to manufacture the products as well as special innovations that

help to reduce the total burden on the environment.

the categories of LCD and plasma screen televisions and LCD

A maximum of 100 points could be reached. The total points for each

computer monitors have been included in this edition. In total

product were adjusted to a possible top score of ten. Because the

we received 50 products from 15 companies.

assessment criteria are often specific to a product category i.e. laptops

The Green Electronics Survey

The principles behind this year’s survey were the same as last year’s:

are not compared with mobile phones, etc, comparisons are only

possible within a product category. In addition one product category

scoring higher than another is not an indication of an overall better

environmental performance of that product category.

leading manufacturers were directly invited to submit their greenest

The criteria are by-and-large the same as those used in 2007. However,

products via an assessment form that was sent to them. In addition,

small changes have been made due to new criteria being added to

the forms were published on the Greenpeace website and other forums

reflect the rapidly changing nature of consumer electronics design. In

to enable smaller manufacturers to participate as well. Each company

addition, there have been changes in international standards such as

was allowed to submit three products per product category, which

those for energy efficiency, and these have been reflected in the survey.

we then assessed and scored against our criteria. To make certain

Therefore, this year’s results cannot be directly compared with the

that the survey was as up-to-date as possible upon its publication, we

results from 2007.

also offered companies the opportunity to submit products that, while

unreleased at the time we contacted them, would be on the market by

Main findings

1 January 2009. If a company submitted more than one product in a

category we chose the highest-scoring device for inclusion in the report.

Once assessments were completed, companies were invited to review

them to ensure accurate product information.

The electronics industry continues to make progress in putting

products on the market with reduced environmental impacts, and this

is confirmed by the results of Greenpeace’s 2008 Green Electronics

Survey. In addition to the overall improvement in the year since the

The products submitted were assessed against four broad groups

first Greenpeace survey, the product scores are increasingly closer

of criteria:

•  Use of hazardous chemical substances, including polyvinyl

chloride (PVC), brominated flame retardants (BFRs), antimony,

phthalates, beryllium and a number of other chemicals.

•  Power consumption of the products, assessed by comparing

them with the Energy Star standards of the US Environmental

together, suggesting a more competitive environment in a ‘race to the

top’ to produce truly green products. There are a number of findings

that underline this trend, but also significant shortcomings in certain

practices.

•  Progress continues with regards to phasing out the use of

hazardous chemicals. More products are PVC-free than in the

previous year’s survey and fewer RoHS (Restriction of Hazardous

Substances) exemptions are being used by the manufacturers.

  l Greenpeace International l Green Electronics: the search continues l Results, Green Electronics Survey l December 2008

For notebooks, LED displays that save energy and avoid the use of

mercury in backlights are becoming more widespread. (See Annex

1 for a fuller explanation of RoHS exemptions).

•  For larger products such as TVs and monitors, significant amounts

of post-consumer recycled plastic are being used, while mobile

phones and - with some exceptions - desktop and notebook

computers are lagging behind in this respect. As producers

establish more comprehensive voluntary take-back and recycling

programmes, increasingly detoxified end-of-life products should be

feeding the increased demand for recycled plastics.

•  Companies have adapted quickly to new Energy Star requirements,

however a small number of products submitted for the survey did

not yet meet the latest of these requirements.

•  While more companies now track the energy used to produce their

products, there is no international standard that allows for a good

comparison of energy embodied in the product to be made.

•  Even though computer manufacturers are generally good at

providing in-use energy data and comparisons for their products,

monitor and television producers need to make this a higher priority.

•  While some companies now have sections on their website that

list green products, these are still usually not prominent enough

to promote green products as a major purchasing decision.

More work needs to be done by companies to integrate the

environmental attributes of their products into their marketing efforts.

Despite the fact that there are major differences between the

various product categories and although the survey does not make

comparisons between the product categories, one product performed

exceptionally well - the Lenovo L0x wide monitor. It is far ahead

of the competition by being PVC and BFR-free (albeit allowing an

unacceptably high limit of 900 ppm bromine and chlorine) and also free

of phthalates, antimony and beryllium. Furthermore, it uses post-

consumer recycled plastic for nearly 30% of its plastic parts and

has a LED backlit display, which negates the use of mercury and

improves energy efficiency.

i

n
o
s
v
a
D
e
t
a
K
/

e
c
a
e
p
n
e
e
r
G
©

Greenpeace International l Green Electronics: the search continues l Results, Green Electronics Survey l December 2008  l 

Summary of results

  Desktop computers

Lenovo takes first place with its ThinkCentre 58/58p model; last

year, Lenovo’s product had the lowest score of all submitted

desktop computers. The Fujitsu Siemens Esprimo E7935 E-Star 4

is only one-tenth of a point behind in second place. The products

submitted by Dell and Hewlett Packard did not reach the 5 points

half-way mark, and Acer, who did not take part in the survey

last year, scored well below 4 points and finds itself in last place.

Unfortunately, no desktop (or notebook) computer submitted is

entirely PVC or BFR-free, which means that computers still lag

behind other product categories when it comes to the use of

Rank

Model

Points

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Toshiba Portege R600

Hewlett Packard Elitebook 2530p

Lenovo X300

Dell Latitude E-4200

Sony VGN-Z11WN/B

Panasonic CF-W7

Acer TravelMate 6293

5.57

5.48

4.68

4.41

4.20

3.80

3.44

hazardous chemicals.

  Mobile phones

Rank

Model

Points

point of each other, but the lead goes to the Samsung SGH-F268.

All the mobile phones submitted to the survey score within one

1

2

3

4

5

Lenovo ThinkCentre 58/M58p

Fujitsu Siemens Esprimo E7935 E-Star 4

Dell Studio Hybrid

Hewlett Packard dc7900e USDT

Acer Veriton M678G

5.88

5.73

4.86

4.73

3.31

The Motorola V9 and Nokia 3110 Evolve are ranked second and

third respectively, with only one-tenth of a point separating them,

while the Sony Ericsson C905 and LG KT520 stay just short of

the half-way 5 points mark – this is still less than one point behind

the leader. A major step has been made in the use of chemicals,

with all but the LG phone claiming to be PVC-free and Samsung’s

phone being free of BFRs, well below the commonly used so-

called ‘halogen-free’ industry limit of 900ppm bromine.

  Notebook computers

Toshiba takes the top spot with its Portege R600, beating

Hewlett Packard’s Elitebook 2530p by a narrow margin.  While

the Hewlett Packard product scores much higher in the lifecycle

category, Toshiba is ahead of everyone else when it comes to the

elimination of toxic chemicals. These are the only products that score

above 5 points out of a maximum possible 10. The Lenovo X300 is

in third place, followed by the Dell Latitude E-4200. Sony, which last

year had the highest-scoring product in this category, is ranked fifth.

Neither Panasonic’s or Acer’s reached the 4 points mark.

Rank

Model

1

2

3

4

5

Samsung SGH-F268

Motorola MOTORAZR V9

Nokia 3110 Evolve

Sony Ericsson C905

LG KT520

Points

5.45

5.20

5.00

4.88

4.61

6  l Greenpeace International l Green Electronics: the search continues l Results, Green Electronics Survey l December 2008

i

n
o
s
v
a
D
e
t
a
K
/

e
c
a
e
p
n
e
e
r
G
©

   Smart phones/PDAs

 Computer monitors

Nokia’s 6210 Navigator secures first place in this category, ahead

The clear winner and the highest-scoring overall product is the

of the Sony Ericsson G900. Both models are PVC-free, but Nokia

Lenovo L2440x widescreen monitor, being free of PVC and BFRs

gets more points due to better energy efficiency and the product’s

as well as other chemicals such as beryllium and antimony. No

lifecycle. Hewlett Packard’s iPAQ is third, ahead of the Blackberry

other monitor submitted has eliminated the use of PVC and

Pearl, which lost a lot of points in the lifecycle criteria and for

BFRs, although Lenovo’s definition of ‘free’ allows use of BFRs

poor energy efficiency, and did not even meet the Energy Star

and PVC up to a limit of 900ppm bromine or chlorine. The Fujitsu

standard. Hewlett Packard’s PDA lagged in the area of hazardous

Siemens SCENICVIEW P22W-5 ECO gets second place and has

eliminated the use of beryllium and also uses zero watts of energy

in sleep and stand-by modes. Third and fourth places are taken

by Samsung’s and LG Electronics’ products, which scored highly

in energy efficiency. The products submitted by Hewlett Packard

and Dell also scored more than 5 points, but Acer’s fell short,

particularly in the lifecycle criteria.

Rank

Model

Points

Points

5.20

4.80

4.20

3.50

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Lenovo L2440x wide

Fujitsu Siemens SCENICVIEW P22W-5 ECO

Samsung 2443BW

LG Electronics W2252TE

Hewlett Packard L1950g

Dell E2009W

Acer V194HQ

6.90

6.33

5.89

5.74

5.48

5.13

4.29

chemicals phase out.

Rank

Model

1

2

3

4

Nokia 6210 Navigator

Sony Ericsson G900

Hewlett Packard iPAQ 910

RIM Blackberry Pearl 8130

   Televisions

There was a tight race for the top spot for televisions that was

ultimately won by the Sharp LC-52GX5. This model scores best

overall even though it does not lead in any of the four sets of

scoring criteria. The Sony KDL-32JEI takes second place and

leads in the lifecycle criteria. These two televisions are sold only in

Japan.  The Panasonic television is ranked last among the three

but has the best performance when it comes to the reduction of

hazardous chemicals used. Unfortunately, LG Electronics had to

pull its submission, when its LCD model television’s release was

delayed past the publication date of this report.

Rank

Model

1

2

3

Sharp LC-52GX5

Sony KDL-32JE1

Panasonic TH-42PZ800U

Points

5.92

5.84

4.96


Greenpeace International l Green Electronics: the search continues l Results, Green Electronics Survey l December 2008  l 

Observations and the ways forward

© Greenpeace / Kate Davison

8  l Greenpeace International l Green Electronics: the search continues l Results, Green Electronics Survey l December 2008

Our second survey showed companies making significant

It is disappointing that Apple has, for a second year running,

improvements over the last year while also leaving significant

decided not to take part in this survey, especially since its new

scope for further gains. Taking the top scores within each

line-up of MacBooks, with drastic PVC and BFR reduction and

criteria and product category, a pathway to the design of truly

high energy efficiency, could have scored well.

green electronics products becomes clear. Companies are still

achieving piecemeal improvements but this need not be the case

– for example, using the technologies employed by the current

market leaders and thus combining the best characteristics of

the submitted desktop products, a significantly greener product

could already be on the market, and a score of well over 7 points

in this survey could be achievable. On top of this, since several

companies now have clear phase-out dates for PVC and BFRs for

their entire product range their potential score could be pushed

above 8 points. Now is the time for manufacturers to combine

their best green practices and put them forth in complete and

integrated fashion into the marketplace.

Designing out toxic chemicals

Significant gains have been made on the reduction of hazardous

chemicals since the first survey commissioned in 2007. The

number of RoHS exemptions used by companies decreased; it

has become commonplace to see products, especially mobile

phones, use only two or three RoHS exemptions (see Annex 1

for a fuller explanation of RoHS exemptions). A total of six mobile

phones and smartphone/PDAs were PVC ‘free’, although most

used an unacceptably high threshold of 900ppm for chlorine and

bromine. Key mobile products (the Motorola Razr V9 and the

Samsung F268) showed that it is possible to eliminate levels of

hazardous PVC and BFRs, respectively, to much lower threshold

levels. The survey also witnessed the first product introduced

to the marketplace that is PVC, BFR, antimony, beryllium and

phthalate free – the Lenovo L2440x widescreen monitor.

Sadly, there is still no notebook manufacturer that manages to

produce PVC and BFR-free products at the time of the survey. A

number of companies have announced they will phase out use of

PVC and BFRs in 2009, which would mean that under the current

criteria it should be possible to manufacture products scoring well

over 8 points in this survey.

Phase out use of PVC and BFRs in consumer electronic

products. In our 2008 survey, we see more products reducing

their uses of hazardous PVC and BFRs and a number moving

towards becoming PVC and BFR-free. It’s imperative that

designing out these toxic chemicals continues; it will have a

positive environmental impact and create financial incentives for

companies to take responsibility for their waste.

Go beyond RoHS exemptions. The use of RoHS exemptions

was seen to decrease in the 2008 survey. Companies are proving,

with increasing frequency, that they no longer need RoHS

exemptions to make successful, highly-functional and profitable

consumer electronics. Greenpeace has compiled a long list of

products offering alternatives for each of the RoHS exemptions

(see http://www.greenpeace.org/raw/content/international/assets/

binaries/ngo-rohs-submission.pdf)

Strengthen the RoHS list. RoHS currently only regulates a

limited list of hazardous chemicals while the list of products or

components that avoid the use of additional hazardous chemicals

(PVC, BFRs, antimony, phthalates and beryllium), as seen in the

2008 survey, continues to grow. More and more often producers

and their component and material suppliers are designing new

models in anticipation of these chemicals being included in an

revised RoHS Directive; it is high time to strengthen the list so that

it reflects the market’s readiness to comply and levels the playing

field for the industry leaders.

Make ‘free’ mean ‘free’. Industry standards for ‘halogen-free’

commonly allow use of bromine (in BFRs) and chlorine (in PVC),

creating an unnecessary loophole that allows for the formation

of toxic chemicals including halogenated dioxins under some

recycling and disposal operations, especially open burning. For

Greenpeace, this level is unacceptable: ‘free’ should mean as

close to zero as possible. For more information, see page 5 of the

document “New Improved Ranking Criteria Explained”, available

at: www.greenpeace.org/international/press/reports/

improved-criteria-explained.pdf


Greenpeace International l Green Electronics: the search continues l Results, Green Electronics Survey l December 2008  l 

Energy efficient products

Product lifestyle approach

Beyond Energy Star. Climate change is now a global priority

Recyclability. As found in the 2007 survey, there appears to be

- it is likely that we are currently seeing a fast technological jump

no common industry practice when calculating recyclability rates.

in energy efficiency because this field of innovation has been

Recyclability claims made by companies in all product categories

otherwise ignored for decades. Energy Star (see Annex 1 for more

ranged as high as 85 to 90% recyclability, and they most likely do not

details) provides a well-recognised benchmark for energy efficiency.

match the reality of common recycling practices. For example, CRT

Our survey shows that these current standards can already be

monitors quoting recyclability levels this high must take into account

surpassed for the devices that we assessed, and should therefore

CRT glass, often over 50% of product weight, which can at best be

be considered to provide a minimum baseline below which a

downcycled and not truly recycled.

company should not even considering marketing a product.

On the other hand, it would seem that there is scope for a

significant strengthening of future standards of energy efficiency

– new products, marketed after this survey was undertaken,

demonstrate that they are able to comfortably beat the records

already identified in our survey. The US Environmental Protection

Agency has already adopted a ‘new approach’, where the much

tighter Energy Star 5.0 standards, which will launch for computers

in July 2009, will be introduced once 25% of products are in

compliance with Energy Star 4.0. This approach should also be

considered by legislators drafting future mandatory requirements,

to get the worst, least energy efficient products off the market as

soon as possible. Certain products, such as desktops, use more

energy and materials in production and are less energy efficienct

during consumer use.

Information for consumers. Making products energy efficient

is not enough. Consumers need information as to how to make

the best use of their devices with regard to energy use. There

are no initiatives reaching very far in providing this information to

consumers, and one could reasonably expect much more from

companies who publicly express their concerns and communicate

their efforts about tackling climate change. Guidelines or even a

standard for the electronics industry to follow should be in place.

To make “recyclability” improvements fit with recycling practices,

manufacturers need better communication with recyclers to also

improve separation and recycling technologies and build capacity

among the organisations and companies in charge of collection

and recycling.

Lifecycle analysis. There is an urgent need to work towards an

industry-wide standard of lifecycle analysis that encompasses

the use of energy and natural resources across the entire chain

of production – from mining, manufacture and distribution

to consumption and end-of-life treatment. In the meantime,

companies should develop their own analysis that covers the

entire product lifecycle. Without knowing and tracking what

resources and how much energy it takes to make a product, it

is hard to determine how significant, systematic changes can

be made. All stakeholders need to be able to understand where

action needs to be taken as a priority, to design out toxics, and to

assess whether actions taken downstream are efficient or merely

shift toxic burdens from one environmental medium to another (for

example, from the soil to the air). With respect to tackling climate

change, it is also essential to have a fair disclosure of total energy

used during the manufacture of products – by fair, meaning that

every company can be judged on the same stages of production

and not according to where it sets its own boundaries for

responsibility; once the carbon footprint of the manufacturing

process has been established, it is also important to consider the

carbon footprint incurred by the mining of raw resources,

for example.

10
10  l Greenpeace International l Green Electronics: the search continues l Results, Green Electronics Survey l December 2008

© Robert Knoth / Greenpeace

Extend the lifecycle of products. To design truly ecologically

sound products, companies need to shift away from products

designed with a limited lifespan (planned obsolescence) and

towards long-living upgradeable goods, with warranty periods

significantly above minimum legal standards and with long

availability of components. Many other initiatives could contribute

towards this objective, from the standardisation of peripherals

and chargers to allowing or offering repair services, easing and

organising safe reuse of second-hand products. Refurbishment

initiatives should also be promoted in developed countries, where

recycling is too focused on metal recovery after shredding the

whole device and condemning most of it to combustion.

Reconsider business models. Move from products to services.

The products evaluated in this survey are physically sold to

customers in a traditional manner. However, as already seen

long ago in the photocopier business, leasing of products (big-size

peripherals or others) instead of selling them is another valid way to

amend business models in the direction of dematerialisation. Moving

to new, service-based business models might enable manufacturers

to design ultra-slim devices backed up by shared and efficiently

used central infrastructure, reducing today’s huge redundancies in

computing and storage capacity in private ICT devices.

Innovations and marketing

It should be noted that the desktops included in this survey are

standard desktop computers and that there are new technologies

available that in some cases allow the use of products with

significantly fewer environmental impacts. For example, offices

with powerful servers and even homes with one standard

desktop can run thin clients on their networks. Thin clients draw

processing power from the server or another desktop and thereby

reducing the need for many stand-alone desktops. Often, thin

clients do not need to have their own motherboard or memory

and use less power and materials than ordinary desktops.

11
Greenpeace International l Green Electronics: the search continues l Results, Green Electronics Survey l December 2008  l 11

Annexes
Annex 1: Methodology of scoring

Products were assessed against four sets of criteria that

include some of the most important issues when it comes

to manufacturing green consumer electronics products.

A maximum of 100 points was available, which was then

adjusted to a score on a ten-point scale for comparison

purposes. In other words, a product’s “score” equals the

total points achieved, divided by 10. Analysis of each

product category included criteria specific to consumer use

and main environmental issues of that product category,

in addition to a number of criteria applicable across all

product categories.

A composite score, per product category, was created

using the top scoring answers from each criteria question.

These best practice scores, ranging as high as 8.6 points,

demonstrate that there is environmental innovation available

now to produce significantly greener products today

While very similar, the scoring for this survey cannot be

compared exactly to the previous scoring that took place

in the survey published in March 2008. This is due to using

updated international standards in areas such as energy

efficiency, and also due to small changes in the scoring to

allow for innovations in product development.

Use of hazardous chemical substances
(30 out of the total of 100 points a product can achieve)

RoHS exemptions

The European Union Directive on the Restriction of the Use of Certain

Hazardous Substances in Electrical and Electronic Equipment (RoHS)

regulates the use in electronic products of certain critical chemicals

namely lead, mercury, cadmium, hexavalent chromium and the

brominated flame retardants PBBs and PBDEs (though not other

BFRs). Since all products are expected to follow current legislation,

they were not awarded points for merely being RoHS compliant.

However, RoHS allows products to still be in compliance if they use the

restricted chemicals in specific listed applications, though only where

substitution is deemed not currently possible, or the substitute would

be more harmful. Companies were asked to provide the exemptions

© Robert Knoth / Greenpeace

1  l Greenpeace International l Green Electronics: the search continues l Results, Green Electronics Survey l December 2008

being used in each product. The fewer exemptions reported for a

product, the more points awarded.

Energy use and power saving
(30 out of the total of 100 points a product can achieve)

PVC and BFRs

Points were awarded if a product was declared free of all PVC

plastics and/or free of all BFRs.  One point was deducted for

using a 900 ppm or greater limit for chlorine/bromine. While many

Consumer electronics play a significant and growing part in an

individual’s carbon footprint. Using energy efficient products
reduces CO2 emissions - and thereby the impact on the climate
- and results in lower household energy bills.

companies now have timelines to phase out these two chemical

Energy Star assessment

groups, there are still very few products on the market that avoid

them altogether. To recognise this, points were awarded where

major components of the product did not use these chemicals:

For PVC:

• External cabling and wire

• Internal cabling and wires (including ribbon cables)

• Housing

• Packaging

• Plastic coated/encased electrical connectors

For BFRs:

• Laminates of printed wiring boards,

  including flexible circuit boards.

• Battery, including casing and components

• Housing (including for periphery equipment, e.g. transformer)

• Fan and fan housing

• Ribbon cables

• Electrical insulation sheet

• Plastic coated/encased electrical connectors

Antimony, phthalates and beryllium

These hazardous chemicals are not currently restricted under the

RoHS Directive. Additional points were awarded for each of these

chemical groups not used in the product.

Energy Star is the energy efficiency rating of the US Environmental

Protection Agency and the US Department of Energy. This

certification has become a globally-accepted standard and sets

benchmarks for a number of products. If these benchmarks

are met or exceeded, products can be labelled as Energy Star

compliant. For the Greenpeace survey, points were awarded

according to the percentage by which devices exceeded Energy

Star minimum requirements. For example, a desktop computer

using 1 Watt in stand-by mode instead of the 2 Watts required by

Energy Star would be 50% better than Energy Star. For desktop

and notebook computers, the stand-by, idle and sleep modes

were taken into account. For mobile phones and PDAs, the

energy efficiency and no-load energy use of the external power

adapters was analysed. Monitors were assessed against off

mode, sleep mode and on mode energy use, while televisions

were compared with the Energy Star requirement for the stand-by

and on modes.

An additional point could be earned for notebooks and desktops

if the products enter sleep mode in a shorter time period than

required by Energy Star during user inactivity. This means power

is saved, since the product spends more time in a lower power

state. Mobile phone and PDA producers could also earn an

additional point by shipping the products with power saving

settings enabled, for example by powering down of the screen

For details of the environmental and human health impacts of the

after a shorter period of time. A point was also available for

chemicals mentioned here, see the Greenpeace report “Toxic Tech

television and computer monitors that have hard-off switches,

– The dangerous chemicals in electronic products”, available at:

which result in a zero watt power consumption.

www.greenpeace.org/international/press/reports/toxic-

tech-chemicals-in-elec

or also see ‘‘Chemical contamination at e-waste recycling and

disposal sites in Accra and Korforidua, Ghana’’, available at:

www.greenpeace.org/raw/content/international/press/

reports/chemical-contamination-at-e-wa.pdf

The detailed requirement for Energy Star qualifying products can

be found on the Energy Star website at www.energystar.gov

Greenpeace International l Green Electronics: the search continues l Results, Green Electronics Survey l December 2008  l 13

Power-saving information

the battery price is of the total price of the device, the more

Points were awarded to companies providing the consumer with

points awarded.

information on how best to reduce the energy consumption of a

Monitors are usually not upgradeable. Instead, the manufacturer’s

device. The more comprehensive the information is, the more points

replacement policy for monitors showing pixel defects have been

awarded to the product. The areas in which points could be scored

analysed and points have been awarded by comparing the company

included provision of an online energy calculator to compare products,

policy with the ISO standard.

public access to environmental data sheets where actual power

consumption is listed, the manual explicitly encouraging power-saving,

additional power-saving tips on company or product websites and

making consumers aware of the connection between climate change

and power consumption. Additional software and hardware energy-

saving functions and solutions were also rewarded. It is possible that

results for these criteria, particularly relating to information to be found

Televisions are not upgradeable, so no points could be awarded.

Instead the overall score for a television’s product lifecycle criterion

was adjusted by a factor of 1.2 to remain consistent with a total of 30

points for this set of criteria.

Warranty

on websites, may have changed since the survey was undertaken.

Points were awarded according to the number of years for which

Product lifecycle
(30 out of the total of 100 points a product can achieve)

products are under manufacturer warranty on the global market. The

longer the warranty time given by the manufacturer, the less likely it is

that the consumer will have to replace a device before it is outdated.

Consumer electronics are known for their short and continuously

Availability of spare parts

diminishing lifecycles that are increasing the burden on the

environment. A longer warranty period, designing products that can be

Similarly to the scoring for warranty, products were awarded points for

upgraded rather than replaced and making spare parts available long

every year that a consumer is able to obtain spare parts for a product

after the production of the device has been discontinued all help to

after production has ceased. The longer these spare parts are available

encourage consumers to keep using the products longer.

the less likely it is that the consumer will dispose of a product rather

Upgradeability

than repair it.

Recyclability

Products were given points for the extent to which they are

upgradeable by the user, with clear directions on how to upgrade parts

being given in the user manual. For computers, upgradeable parts

Because the recyclability rate is difficult to define and compare

between products, the definition of the European Union Waste

included the system memory, the hard drive, the graphics card (GPU),

Electrical and Electronic Equipment Directive (WEEE Directive) was

the processor (CPU) and the optical drive (CD/DVD). Parts that are

applied. This directive gives a definition of recycling that excludes

usually replaced rather than upgraded (such as fans in computers, for

energy recovery. Energy recovery is a means of generating energy by

example) were not included.

directly incinerating combustible waste, with or without other waste,

and recovering the heat. Indeed, energy recovery from combustion

For mobile phones and PDAs, upgradeable parts included the battery

eliminates the possibility to effectively reuse waste through material

and memory cards. In addition, points have been allocated according

recycling and therefore cannot be considered true recycling. The

to the price of the battery compared with the price of the actual device.

directive also demands a legal minimum percentage of recyclability per

Since the battery usually needs earlier replacement and expensive

batteries are an incentive for the consumer to discard the product

weight of the device. Computers, for example, need to be at least 65%

recyclable. Points were awarded according to how much a device

rather than to simply replace the battery. The smaller the percentage

exceeds the legal minimum recyclability rate of the WEEE directive.

1  l Greenpeace International l Green Electronics: the search continues l Results, Green Electronics Survey l December 2008

i

n
o
s
v
a
D
e
t
a
K
/

e
c
a
e
p
n
e
e
r
G
©

In the 2008 survey, when reviewing the companies’ submissions, we

were confronted by figures claiming recyclability rates that were unlikely

Innovation and marketing
(10 out of the total of 100 points a product can achieve)

to be matched in practice. Such figures presumably do not take into

account the destruction of certain materials during recovery processes,

Energy during production

for example, discounting some plastics or resins that will be destroyed

during the recovery of metal parts in a smelter. Although smelting of

e-waste is considered a state-of-the-art recycling process for recovering

metals in electronic scrap, the plastics in the scrap (for example, whole

mobile phones or printed circuit boards) are not materially recovered.

Therefore the maximum points that could be obtained from this

criterion were reduced, and additional points were awarded instead if

companies could provide an independent assessment backing up their

recyclability claims.

Use of recycled plastic

The energy used to manufacture a product is as important to

investigate as the energy it takes to power a device during consumer

use. Reducing energy during production plays an important role in

reducing the impact on natural resources and the climate. Unfortunately,

there is no existing global standard that allows for comparing products

under this category. Therefore, points were awarded to products for

which companies have an energy lifecycle analysis that takes into

account a significant part of the production chain of that particular

product model. Activities that should be included when calculating

the energy taken to make a product include the extraction and

refining of natural resources, production of materials (e.g. plastics), the

Points were awarded for products using significant amounts of recycled

manufacturing of parts provided by suppliers, the manufacturing of

plastics, and additional innovation points were awarded for products

that use mostly post-consumer recycled plastic rather than just post-

industrial recycled plastic. The increased demand for post-consumer

plastic drives the waste collection of these plastics via take-back

practices and encourages toxic elimination in design, in turn making

plastics more easily recyclable. Additionally, recycling saves the energy

parts by the brand owner, the shipping of parts to the assembly facility,

the assembly itself and the distribution of the products to importers and

wholesalers. Points were awarded for each of the major stages included

in the assessment. However, companies that only calculate the energy

of the final assembly stage of production were not awarded any points.

embodied in materials, reducing the impacts on greenhouse gas

Visibility and promotion

emissions and climate change.

Coding of plastic parts

Coding plastic parts of electronic products is important to ensure that

they are treated and recycled properly at the end of life of the product.

In many instances only the larger plastic components in a product are

coded. Points were awarded for products that also code plastic parts

weighing less than 25g, the limit usually applied under an ISO standard.

Take-back

The companies’ take-back programmes were analysed to see whether

they focused on individual financial responsibility for the recycling and

disposal of the submitted products in the geographic locations where

they were sold. The better the take-back programme, which must be

Electronics companies spend huge amounts of money advertising and

promoting their products. The more visible green products are, the

more likely they are going to be purchased by consumers. To determine

this visibility, the amount of website navigation (such as the number of

clicks or drop-down menus) required to reach the specifications of a

product was assessed. The less website navigation needed, the more

points awarded. The average of a number of major websites visited was

used and it is possible that the sites accessed for this assessment have

since changed.

Other innovations

Green innovations going beyond common practices were awarded with

additional points. These include mercury-free and more energy-efficient

LED lights in screens, a significant weight percentage of post-consumer

cost-free to the consumer or last owner, and the better the information

recycled plastic, zero watt stand-by power use, or manufacturing

provided to the consumer about where the products can be returned to

extremely light or durable products.

at their end-of-life, the more points were awarded.

Greenpeace International l Green Electronics: the search continues l Results, Green Electronics Survey l December 2008  l 1

Annex : Detailed product line-up

Desktops

The desktop category was dominated by the products from

Fujitsu Siemens and Lenovo, with the Lenovo ThinkCentre

M58/M58p taking first place. The scoring of these products was,

by and large, close throughout all sets of criteria. The special

points awarded to Lenovo for using recycled plastic that is entirely

from post-consumer sources rather than post-industrial made a

Criteria

Chemicals

PVC-free

significant difference in the final score.

The Esprimo E7935 by Fujitsu Siemens is the leading product when

it comes to use of hazardous chemicals, being the only submitted

product free of beryllium and beryllium compounds (one of the toxic

chemicals groups not currently regulated under RoHS). The Dell

PVC-containing parts

BFR-free

BFR-containing parts

Antimony-free

Phthalate-free

Studio Hybrid and the Hewlett Packard dc7900e USDT make up

Beryllium-free

the second group of products. The reason why they lag behind the

front runners is due to their much weaker performance under the

chemicals criteria.

The Dell model scores best out of all models when it comes to

energy efficiency and providing the consumers with power-saving

information. The Dell is also awarded with special points for the

very small and light design of the product and the recycling kit that

RoHS exemptions used

Energy use

Stand-by % better than Energy Star

Sleep % better than Energy Star

Idle % better than Energy Star

Inactivity-to-sleep (minutes)

comes with it. The Acer Veriton M678G falls far behind because of

Power-saving information

weak scoring on energy efficiency.

Like last year the recyclability rates reported by the companies

for their products are likely to be significantly overstated and

Lifecycle

Upgradeable parts

Warranty in years

none provided us with an independent assessment of their

Component availability in years

recycling rates.

It is disappointing to note that none of the desktop manufacturers

has yet introduced a product that is PVC or BFR-free.

WEEE recyclability rate (%)

Independent assessment for
recyclability rate provided

Recycled plastic weight %

Plastic part coded at < grams

Take-back programme
and information

Other

Energy during production analysis

Parts of production chain included
in assessment

Other special features

Visibility on web



3



3

3

3

3

11

8

8

8

1









3

1

3

1

3

1

3

3

3

Total adjusted points

10

16  l Greenpeace International l Green Electronics: the search continues l Results, Green Electronics Survey l December 2008

Maximum
points

Lenovo ThinkCentre
M8/M8p

Fujitsu Siemens ESPRIMO

E3 E-Star 

Dell Studio Hybrid

HP dc00e USDT

Acer Veriton M68G

Results

Points

Results

Points

Results

Points

Results

Points

Results

Points

Combining

greenest parts

from products

submitted

1.8

1.8

1.8

NO

3

NO

6

NO

NO

NO

3

6.%

68.1%

1.1%

0

YES



3



%

NO

%

NO

YES

NO

0

YES

3

0

1.8

0

0.

0

0

0

8

8

8

3

1

3







3

0

3

0

1

0

0



1.

.88

NO

NO

3

3

NO

NO

YES

6

3.0%

.6%

.6%

60

YES



3



%

NO

0

NO

YES

NO

0

3

NO

0

1.8

0



3.

0

0

3



6

8



0







3

0

0

0

0

0

0

1.

1.

.3

NO

NO

3



NO

NO

NO

8

.6%

6.6%

61.%

1

YES



1

3

8%

NO

1%

NO

YES

NO

0

YES

.

0

0

1

0

0

0

3





8

1





1

3



0



0



0

0



1.

.86

NO

NO

3



NO

NO

NO

8

3.8%

3.0%

38.3%

30

YES



3



0%

NO

0

NO

YES

NO

0



NO

1.8

1.

6

 6

0

0

0

0

0

3

6

0









3

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

1

.3

NO

NO

3



NO

NO

NO

3

1.%

13.8%

1.0%

30

YES



1

3

%

partly

0

NO

YES

NO

0

NO

.

0

0

1

0

0

0

8







0





1

3

3

0

0

1

0

0

0

0

0



0

0

3

8

8

8

8

1









3

3

0



0

0

3

0.

0.

1.

3.31

1.

.1

i

n
o
s
v
a
D
e
t
a
K
/

e
c
a
e
p
n
e
e
r
G
©

RoHS exemptions used

11

Criteria

Chemicals

PVC-free

BFR-free

PVC-containing parts

BFR-containing parts

Antimony-free

Phthalate-free

Beryllium-free

Energy use

Stand-by % better than Energy Star

Sleep % better than Energy Star

Idle % better than Energy Star

Inactivity-to-sleep (minutes)

Power-saving information

Lifecycle

Upgradeable parts

Warranty in years

Component availability in years

WEEE recyclability rate (%)

Independent assessment for

recyclability rate provided

Recycled plastic weight %

Plastic part coded at < grams

Take-back programme

and information

Other

Energy during production analysis

Parts of production chain included

in assessment

Other special features

Visibility on web



3



3

3

3

3

8

8

8

1









3

1

3

1

3

1

3

3

3

Total adjusted points

10

Maximum

points

Lenovo ThinkCentre

M8/M8p

Fujitsu Siemens ESPRIMO
E3 E-Star 

Dell Studio Hybrid

HP dc00e USDT

Acer Veriton M68G

Results

Points

Results

Points

Results

Points

Results

Points

Results

Points

Combining
greenest parts
from products
submitted

NO

NO

3

6

NO

NO

NO

3

6.%

68.1%

1.1%

0

YES



3



%

NO

%

NO

YES

NO

0

3

YES

1.8

0.

0

0

0

0

0

8

8

8

3

1

3







3

0

3

0

1

0

0



1.

.88

NO

3

NO

3

NO

NO

YES

6

3.0%

.6%

.6%

60

YES



3



%

NO

0

NO

YES

NO

0

NO

3

0

1.8

0



0

0

3



6

8



0

3.







3

0

0

0

1.

0

0

0

1.

.3

NO

3

NO



NO

NO

NO

8

.6%

6.6%

61.%

1

YES



1

3

8%

NO

1%

NO

YES

NO

0

YES

.

0

1.8

0

1

0

0

0

3





8

1





1

3



0



0



0

0



1.

.86

NO

3

NO



NO

NO

NO

8

3.8%

3.0%

38.3%

30

YES



3



0%

NO

0

NO

YES

NO

0

NO



0

1.8

0

1.

0

0

0

3

6

 6

6

0









3

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

1

.3

NO

3

NO



NO

NO

NO

3

1.%

13.8%

1.0%

30

YES



1

3

%

partly

0

NO

YES

NO

0

NO

.

0

1.8

0

1.8

0

1

0

0

0

8







0





1

3

3

0



0

0

3

8

8

8

8

1









3

0.

0.

0

0

1

0

0

0

3

0



0

0

3

1.

3.31

1.

.1

Greenpeace International l Green Electronics: the search continues l Results, Green Electronics Survey l December 2008  l 11

RoHS exemptions used

11

Notebook computers

As with desktops, there are two products

in the notebook category that vie for

the top spot, with the Toshiba Portege

R600 winning narrowly over the Hewlett

Criteria

Chemicals

PVC-free

Packard Elitebook 2530p. While the

PVC-containing parts

Toshiba notebook earns the highest

BFR-free

scores when it comes to avoiding

hazardous chemicals, the Elitebook is

more energy efficient.

Three other products, namely the Lenovo

X300, Dell Latitude E-4200, and the Sony

Vaio Sony VGN-Z11WN/B make it over

the 4 points mark. At the bottom end of

the scale, the Panasonic CF-W7 and Acer

TravelMate 6293 score the lowest points

overall and specifically in the lifecycle set

of criteria.

All but one product earn special

BFR-containing parts

Antimony-free

Phthalate-free

Beryllium-free

Energy use

Stand-by % better than Energy
Star

Sleep % better than Energy Star

Idle % better than Energy Star

Inactivity-to-sleep (minutes)

Power-saving information

innovation points for using LED displays

that reduce energy consumption and the

Lifecycle

use of mercury. While Panasonic’s display

Upgradeable parts

is a conventional LCD, the company

Warranty in years

earns innovation points because its

notebook is a “toughbook” that is

extremely durable and can withstand

drops, pressure and spills. Toshiba

gets an additional point for using post–

consumer recycled plastic parts.

Component availability in years

WEEE recyclability rate (%)

Independent assessment for
recyclability rate provided

Recycled plastic weight %

Plastic part coded at < grams

Take-back programme
and information

Other

Energy during production analysis

Parts of production chain included
in assessment

Other special features

Visibility on web

Maximum
points



3



3

3

3

3

8

8

8

1









3

1

3

1

3

1

3

3

3

Total adjusted points

10

Toshiba Portege R600

HP Elitebook 30p

Lenovo X300

Dell Latitude E-00

Sony VGN-Z11WN/B

Panasonic CF-W

Acer TravelMate 63

Results

Points

Results

Points

Results

Points

Results

Points

Results

Points

Results

Points

Results

Points

Combining

greenest parts

from products

submitted

NO



NO



NO

NO

YES

3

8.%

38.3%

3.1%

1

YES

1

1



0%

NO

8.8%

NO

YES

YES

6

YES

3.

NO

1

NO

6

NO

NO

NO



0.0%

31.3%

.1%

30

YES



3



1%

NO

0

NO

YES

NO

0

YES

3.

0

.

0

1

0

0

3

8



6

6

1

3

1

1



3

0

1

0



1

3

3

1.

.

0

3

0

0.

0

0

0









0









3

0

0

0

1

0

0



1.

.8

1.

.68

1.

.1

3.80

1.

3.

1.

.0

NO

NO

3



NO

NO

NO

6

3.%

.%

1.%



YES

3

1



0%

NO

1%

NO

YES

NO

0

3

YES

1.8

1.

0

0

0

0

0







8

1



3

1



3

0

1

0

1

0

0



NO

NO

3



NO

NO

NO



.%

0.0%

1.%

1

YES



3



8%

NO

1%

NO

YES

NO

0

YES

3.

0

1.8

0

1

0

0

0





3



1

3









0



0



0

0



NO

NO

1

3

NO

NO

YES



10%

0%

16.%



YES

1

1

6

0%

NO

0

NO

YES

YES





YES

NO

NO

1



NO

NO

NO



10%

0.8%

8.6%

0

YES

1

1



%

NO

0

NO

YES

YES





YES

0

3

0



0

0

3

6



0

3

1

3

1

1

6

3

0

0

0



1



.

0.

.0

0

3

0

0

0

0

0

6



3



1



1

1



1

0

0

0

1

1





1

NO

NO





NO

NO

NO



3.3%

10.0%

1.%

30

YES



1

3

8%

0

NO

YES

NO

0

3

YES

.

0

0

1

0

0

0









0





1

3



0

0

1

0

0



0

3

0



0

0

3

8



6

8

1









3



0



1

3

3

partly

0.

0.

18  l Greenpeace International l Green Electronics: the search continues l Results, Green Electronics Survey l December 2008

e
c
a
e
p
n
e
e
r
G

/

h
t
o
n
K

t
r
e
b
o
R
©

PVC-containing parts

.

BFR-containing parts

0.

Criteria

Chemicals

PVC-free

BFR-free

Antimony-free

Phthalate-free

Beryllium-free

Energy use



3



3

3

3

3

8

8

8

1









3

1

3

1

3

1

3

3

3

RoHS exemptions used

11

Stand-by % better than Energy

Star

Sleep % better than Energy Star

Idle % better than Energy Star

Inactivity-to-sleep (minutes)

Power-saving information

Lifecycle

Upgradeable parts

Warranty in years

Component availability in years

WEEE recyclability rate (%)

Independent assessment for

recyclability rate provided

Recycled plastic weight %

Plastic part coded at < grams

Take-back programme

and information

Other

Energy during production analysis

Parts of production chain included

in assessment

Other special features

Visibility on web

Maximum

points

Toshiba Portege R600

HP Elitebook 30p

Lenovo X300

Dell Latitude E-00

Sony VGN-Z11WN/B

Panasonic CF-W

Acer TravelMate 63

Results

Points

Results

Points

Results

Points

Results

Points

Results

Points

Results

Points

Results

Points

Combining
greenest parts
from products
submitted

NO

NO





NO

NO

YES

3

8.%

38.3%

3.1%

1

YES

1

1



0%

NO

8.8%

NO

YES

YES

6

YES

3.

0

0

1

0

0

3

8



6

6

1

3

1

1



3

0

1

0



1

3

3

NO

NO

1

6

NO

NO

NO



0.0%

31.3%

.1%

30

YES



3



1%

NO

0

NO

YES

NO

0

YES

3.

0

3

0

0

0

0









0









3

0

0

0

1

0

0



NO

3

NO



NO

NO

NO

6

3.%

.%

1.%



YES

3

1



0%

NO

1%

NO

YES

NO

0

YES

3

0

1.8

0

1.

0

0

0







8

1



3

1



3

0

1

0

1

0

0



1.

.68

NO

3

NO



NO

NO

NO



.%

0.0%

1.%

1

YES



3



8%

NO

1%

NO

YES

NO

0

YES

3.

0

1.8

0

1

0

0

0





3



1

3









0



0



0

0



1.

.1

NO

1

NO

3

NO

NO

YES



10%

0%

16.%



YES

1

1

6

0%

NO

0

NO

YES

YES



YES



NO

1

NO



NO

NO

NO



10%

0.8%

8.6%

0

YES

1

1



%

NO

0

NO

YES

YES



YES



0

3

0



0

0

3

6



0

3

1

3

1

1

6

3

0

0

0



1

.



0.

.0

0

3

0

0

0

0

0

6



3



1



1

1



1

0

0

0

1

1





1

3.80

NO



NO



NO

NO

NO



3.3%

10.0%

1.%

30

YES



1

3

8%

0

.

0

1

0

0

0









0





1

3



0

3

0



0

0

3

8



6

8

1









3

partly

0.

0.

0

NO

YES

NO

0

YES

3

0

0

1

0

0





0



1

3

3

1.

3.

1.

.0

Greenpeace International l Green Electronics: the search continues l Results, Green Electronics Survey l December 2008  l 1

Total adjusted points

10

1.

.

1.

.8

Mobile phones

While only one product scored over 5 points in the 2007

survey, this year three out of the five submitted products reach

the halfway mark. The winner is the Samsung SGH-F268, a

remarkable achievement since last year’s survey when the

Criteria

Chemicals

PVC-free

Samsung phone was in the last place. It is also the only product

PVC-containing parts

to be free of BFRs, at levels well below the industry standard of

BFR-free

900ppm. The Motorola MOTORAZR V9 scores particularly well in

avoiding hazardous chemicals and is the only product to be free

of beryllium and its compounds. The Nokia 3310 Evolve obtains

the third place; Nokia also submitted the recently released 7200

BFR-containing parts

Antimony-free

Phthalate-free

Supernova, which is the first mobile phone to be free of BFRs

Beryllium-free

(albeit using a 900ppm limit) but unfortunately scores less than the

RoHS exemptions used

Nokia 3110 Evolve overall despite its strong performance under

the hazardous chemicals criteria.

Fourth place goes to the Sony Ericsson, which falls just short of

the 5 points mark. Only the LGE KT520 was declared not to be

PVC-free and it is this performance in chemicals that is likely to

Energy use

External adapter efficiency
% better than Energy Star

No-load % better than Energy Star

Shipped with power-saving enabled

have resulted in its obtaining fifth place, even though there has

Power-saving information

been an improvement by LG Electronics in its scoring over the

Lifecycle

previous survey. Overall, there has been a significant improvement

with regards to the reduction in RoHS exemptions still being

used by the companies, with only Nokia relying on more than two

exemptions in its products (six in total).

Upgradeable parts

Battery vs. unit costs

Warranty in years

Innovation points were awarded to Motorola, for its very low

threshold for declaring its product to be PVC-free, and to Nokia

for using bio-plastic in the cover of its phone. However, Nokia did

Components availability in years

WEEE recyclability rate (%)

Independent assessment for
recyclability rate provided

not provide additional information on what type of bio-plastic it

Recycled plastic weight %

is using or how it is grown and therefore the possible maximum

environmental benefit (and innovation points for this survey) in

using this bio-plastic could not be assessed.

Plastic part coded at < grams

Take-back programme and information

Other

Energy during production analysis

Parts of production chain included in
assessment

Other special features

Visibility on web



3



3

3

3

3

11

1

1

1



1







3

1

3

1

3

1

3

3

3

YES

n/a

YES

n/a

NO

NO

NO



.3%

66.%

YES

YES



6%

1

3

8%

NO

0

YES

YES

YES



NO



Total adjusted points

10

0  l Greenpeace International l Green Electronics: the search continues l Results, Green Electronics Survey l December 2008

Maximum
points

Samsung SGH-F68

Motorola MOTORAZR V

Nokia 3110 Evolve

Sony Ericsson C0

LG KT0

Results

Points

Results

Points

Results

Points

Results

Points

Results

Points

Combining

greenest parts

from products

submitted



n/a



n/a

0

0

0





1

1

3

1



1

3



0

0

1



1

.

0

1

.

1

1

1

1

n/a

n/a

1.8

.

n/a

n/a

YES

n/a

NO



NO

YES

YES



.8%

86.%

YES

YES

10%



1



6%

NO

0

YES

YES

NO

0



YES

n/a

.

1

1

.



0

0

3

3



1

1

3

1



0

0

0

1



0

0



1

YES

n/a

NO

1

NO

NO

NO

6

.%

0%

YES

YES

%







6%

NO

0

YES

YES

YES

6



YES



0

3

0

0

0





1



1

0

3



0

0

0

1



1

3

1

1

YES

n/a

NO

1

NO

NO

NO



0%

66.%

YES

YES

8%



1

3

%

NO

0

YES

YES

YES

6

NO

.



0

3

0

0

0



0

1

3

1

3

1

3

1

0

0

1

1

1

3

0

NO

NO

3



NO

NO

NO



0.%

66.%

YES

YES

10%



1

3

8.1%

No

0

YES

YES

YES

3

NO

3.

0

0

0

0

0



0

1

3

1

3

1

3



0

0

1



1

0

.0

.00

1.

.88

1.

1.

.61

1.

.18





0

3

3





1



1



3





0

0

1



1

3

3

i

n
o
s
v
a
D
e
t
a
K
/

e
c
a
e
p
n
e
e
r
G
©

Maximum

points

Samsung SGH-F68

Motorola MOTORAZR V

Nokia 3110 Evolve

Sony Ericsson C0

LG KT0

Results

Points

Results

Points

Results

Points

Results

Points

Results

Points

Combining
greenest parts
from products
submitted

YES

n/a

NO



NO

YES

YES



.8%

86.%

YES

YES



10%

1



6%

NO

0

YES

YES

NO

0

YES





n/a

0

.

0

3

3



1

1

1

.

1

3

1



0

0

0

1



0

0



1

YES

n/a

NO

1

NO

NO

NO

6

.%

0%

YES

YES



%





6%

NO

0

YES

YES

YES

6

YES





n/a

0

3

0

0

0





1

1



1

0

3



0

0

0

1



1

3

1

1

YES

n/a

NO

1

NO

NO

NO



0%

66.%

YES

YES



8%

1

3

%

NO

0

YES

YES

YES

6

NO

.

Total adjusted points

10

.0

.00



n/a

0

3

0

0

0



0

1

1

3

1

3

1

3

1

0

0

1

1

1

3

0

1.

.88

NO

3

NO



NO

NO

NO



0.%

66.%

YES

YES



10%

1

3

8.1%

No

0

YES

YES

YES

3

NO

3.

0

1.8

0

.

0

0

0



0



n/a



n/a

0

3

3





1

1

1

3

1

3

1

3



0

0

1



1

1.

0

1.

.61

1



1



3





0

0

1



1

3

3

1.

.18

Criteria

Chemicals

PVC-free

BFR-free

PVC-containing parts

BFR-containing parts

Antimony-free

Phthalate-free

Beryllium-free

RoHS exemptions used

Energy use

External adapter efficiency

% better than Energy Star

No-load % better than Energy Star

Shipped with power-saving enabled

Power-saving information

Lifecycle

Upgradeable parts

Battery vs. unit costs

Warranty in years

Components availability in years

WEEE recyclability rate (%)

Independent assessment for

recyclability rate provided

Recycled plastic weight %

Plastic part coded at < grams

Take-back programme and information

Other

Energy during production analysis

Parts of production chain included in

assessment

Other special features

Visibility on web

11

1

1



3



3

3

3

3

1



1







3

1

3

1

3

1

3

3

3

YES

n/a

YES

n/a

NO

NO

NO



.3%

66.%

YES

YES

6%



1

3

8%

NO

0

YES

YES

YES





NO

n/a

n/a

1





0

0

0





1

3

1



1

3



0

0

1



1

0

1

.

.

Greenpeace International l Green Electronics: the search continues l Results, Green Electronics Survey l December 2008  l 1

Smart phones/PDAs

With its 6210 Navigator, Nokia is the clear winner in the smart

phone/PDA category. While it scores less than the winning mobile

phone it is the best scoring PDA mainly because it is the most

energy efficient and Nokia provides a lot of information to its

customers on how to save power.

Second place goes to the Sony Ericsson G900, which did

particularly well in the chemicals category. The Hewlett Packard

Criteria

Chemicals

PVC-free

PVC-containing parts

BFR-free

BFR-containing parts

iPAQ910 is third, while the Blackberry Pearl 8310 is the only

Antimony-free

phone whose power supply does not meet the new Energy Star

Phthalate-free

requirements.

Beryllium-free

No special points were awarded in this product category. It should

RoHS exemptions used

be pointed out that, for phones and PDAs, no real independent

Energy use

assessments of the claimed recyclability rates were provided. The

recyclability rates provided fluctuate widely and it is likely that some

are overly optimistic.

External adapter efficiency % better than Energy Star

No-load % better than Energy Star

Shipped with power-saving enabled

When combining the best scores for each set of criteria it becomes

Power-saving information

obvious that, while the currently-achievable score is lower than

for mobile phones, companies should be able to already produce

PDAs that score significantly higher than at present.

Lifecycle

Upgradeable parts

Battery vs. unit costs

Warranty in years

Components availability in years

WEEE recyclability rate (%)

Independent assessment for recyclability rate provided

Recycled plastic weight %

Plastic part coded at < grams

Take-back programme and information

Other

Energy during production analysis

Parts of production chain included in assessment

Other special features

Visibility on web

Total adjusted points

Maximum points

Nokia 610 Navigator

Sony Ericsson G00

HP iPAQ 10

RIM Blackberry Pearl 8130

Results

Points

Results

Points

Results

Points

Results

Points

1

1

1

1



3



3

3

3

3

11

1

1

1



1







3

1

3

1

3

1

3

3

3

YES

n/a

NO

1

NO

YES

NO

6

.%

0%

YES

YES

13%







80%

NO

0

YES

YES

NO

NO

0



n/a



0

3

0

3

0





1



1



3





0

0

1



0

0

0

1

YES

n/a

NO



NO

NO

NO



0%

66.%

YES

YES

%



1

3

%

NO

0

YES

YES

YES

NO

6

3

n/a

.



0

0

0

0



0

1

3

1

3

1

3

1

0

0

1

1

1

3

0

NO

NO





NO

NO

NO



3.6%

6.%

YES

YES

1.%

10%



1



NO

0

NO

YES

NO

0

NO

3.

1.

1.

0

0

0

0

0



1

1

1

1

3

1



3

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

NO

NO

1

1

YES

NO

NO

6

-.%

0%

YES

YES

10%



1

3

6%

NO

0

YES

NO

NO

NO

0

3

10

.0

1.

.80

1.

.0

1.

3.0

1.

6.

Combining

greenest parts

from products

submitted

n/a



0

3

3

3

0





1



1

3

3



3

0

0

1



1

3

0

1.

0

3

0

3

3

0

0



0

8

1

1

3

1

3

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

0

  l Greenpeace International l Green Electronics: the search continues l Results, Green Electronics Survey l December 2008

e
c
a
e
p
n
e
e
r
G

/

h
t
o
n
K

t
r
e
b
o
R
©

Maximum points

Nokia 610 Navigator

Sony Ericsson G00

HP iPAQ 10

RIM Blackberry Pearl 8130

Results

Points

Results

Points

Results

Points

Results

Points

Combining
greenest parts
from products
submitted

YES

n/a

NO

1

NO

YES

NO

6

External adapter efficiency % better than Energy Star

.%

0%

YES

YES



13%





80%

NO

0

YES

YES

NO

0

NO





n/a

0

3

0

3

0





1

1



1



3





0

0

1



0

0

0

1

YES

n/a

NO



NO

NO

NO



0%

66.%

YES

YES



%

1

3

%

NO

0

YES

YES

YES

6

NO

3

10

.0



n/a

0

.

0

0

0



0

1

1

3

1

3

1

3

1

0

0

1

1

1

3

0

1.

.80

NO



NO



NO

NO

NO



3.6%

6.%

YES

YES



10%

1



1.%

NO

0

NO

YES

NO

0

NO

3.

0

1.

0

1.

0

0

0



1

1

1

1

1

3

1



3

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

1.

.0

NO

1

NO

1

YES

NO

NO

6

-.%

0%

YES

YES



10%

1

3

6%

NO

0

YES

NO

NO

0

NO

3

0

3

0

3

3

0

0



0

8

1

1.

1

3

1

3

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

0



n/a

0

3

3

3

0





1

1



1

3

3



3

0

0

1



1

3

0

1.

3.0

1.

6.

Criteria

Chemicals

PVC-free

BFR-free

PVC-containing parts

BFR-containing parts

Antimony-free

Phthalate-free

Beryllium-free

RoHS exemptions used

Energy use

No-load % better than Energy Star

Shipped with power-saving enabled

Power-saving information

Lifecycle

Upgradeable parts

Battery vs. unit costs

Warranty in years

Components availability in years

WEEE recyclability rate (%)

Independent assessment for recyclability rate provided

Recycled plastic weight %

Plastic part coded at < grams

Take-back programme and information

Other

Energy during production analysis

Parts of production chain included in assessment

Other special features

Visibility on web

Total adjusted points

11

1

1



3



3

3

3

3

1



1







3

1

3

1

3

1

3

3

3

Greenpeace International l Green Electronics: the search continues l Results, Green Electronics Survey l December 2008  l 3

Results

Points

Results

Points

Results

Points

Combining

greenest parts

from products

submitted

Televisions

Criteria

Maximum points

Sharp  LC-GX

SONY KDL-3JE1

Panasonic TH-PZ800U Plasma

This is the first time that televisions, both plasma and LCD

screens, are included in this survey, and all major manufacturers

with the exception of Samsung decided to submit products. LG

Chemicals

Electronics pulled the submission of its soon-to-be-released LCD

PVC-free

model when the product release timeline was delayed past the

publication and release timeline of this survey.

PVC-containing parts

BFR-free

The Sharp LC-52GX5 is the highest scoring product due to its

BFR-containing parts

superior performance under the hazardous chemicals criteria.

It is the only product that avoids all uses of beryllium and its

compounds and only uses BFRs and PVC in one major product

component (printed wiring board laminates and antenna cable,

Antimony-free

Phthalate-free

Beryllium-free

respectively). It also receives an innovation half point for plant-

RoHS exemptions used

based paint. The Sony KDL-32JE1 earns second place, gaining

Energy use

innovation points for using recycled plastic in 50% of plastic parts

by weight. The Sharp and the Sony TVs only are available on the

Japanese market. Even though it does not break the 5-points

On-mode % better than Energy Star

Stand-by % better than Energy Star

barrier, the Panasonic TH-42PZ800U plasma is not far behind and

Hard-off switch

gains innovation points for having a mercury and lead-free display.

Power-saving information

While it is realistic that large products such as televisions have a

Lifecycle*

higher recyclability rate than smaller mobile phones, the recyclability

Warranty in years

rates claimed by companies seem to be higher than what is

Components availability in years

achievable. Sharp has a very high recycling rate and claims to have

WEEE recyclability rate (%)

worked with an independent organisation to verify this rate. This is

a step in the right direction but the recyclability rate reported still

seems to be higher than what might actually be achievable.

Because televisions are usually not consumer upgradeable, only

Independent assessment for recyclability rate provided

Recycled plastic weight %

Plastic part coded at < grams

Take-back programme and information

25 points were available in the lifecycle set of criteria instead

of the 30 available in other product categories. Therefore, the

Other

calculation of points was adjusted to a total of 30, in order to keep

Energy during production analysis

with the 10-point scale ranking.

Parts of production chain included in assessment

Other special features

Visibility on web

Total adjusted points

  l Greenpeace International l Green Electronics: the search continues l Results, Green Electronics Survey l December 2008

1

1

1

1



3



3

3

3

3

11

1

1

1







3

1

3

1

3

1

3

3

3

10

NO

NO

1

1

NO

NO

YES



3.3%

0.0%

NO

YES

1

8

%

Partly

3.%

NO

YES

YES

YES

6



0

3

0

3

0

0

3



8

0



1



3

1

0

1

1

3

0.

0.

0.

.

NO

NO

1



NO

NO

NO

6

3.8%

8.0%

NO

YES

1

8

0%

NO

0%

YES

YES

YES

YES





.

0

3

0

0

0

0





0

3

1



3

0

3

1



1





.

.8

NO

NO





NO

NO

NO



10.%

80.0%

YES

YES

1

8

6%

NO

<1%

NO

YES

Yes



YES

.

.

1.

0

0

0

0

0





1



1



3

0

0

0

1

1



1.

0.

.6

0

3

0

3

0

0

3



8

1

3

1



3

3

1



1

3

3



0.

.0

i

n
o
s
v
a
D
e
t
a
K
/

e
c
a
e
p
n
e
e
r
G
©

Criteria

Chemicals

PVC-free

BFR-free

PVC-containing parts

BFR-containing parts

Antimony-free

Phthalate-free

Beryllium-free

RoHS exemptions used

Energy use

On-mode % better than Energy Star

Stand-by % better than Energy Star

Hard-off switch

Power-saving information

Lifecycle*

Warranty in years

Components availability in years

WEEE recyclability rate (%)

Independent assessment for recyclability rate provided

Recycled plastic weight %

Plastic part coded at < grams

Take-back programme and information

Other

Energy during production analysis

Parts of production chain included in assessment

Other special features

Visibility on web

Total adjusted points

Maximum points

Sharp  LC-GX

SONY KDL-3JE1

Panasonic TH-PZ800U Plasma

Results

Points

Results

Points

Results

Points

Combining
greenest parts
from products
submitted

11

1

1



3



3

3

3

3

1







3

1

3

1

3

1

3

3

3

10

NO

1

NO

1

NO

NO

YES



3.3%

0.0%

NO

YES

1

8

%

Partly

3.%

NO

YES

YES

6

YES



0

3

0

3

0

0

3



8

1

0



1



3

0.

1

0

1

1

3

0.

0.

.

NO

1

NO



NO

NO

NO

6

3.8%

8.0%

NO

YES

1

8

0%

NO

0%

YES

YES

YES



YES



0

3

0

.

0

0

0





1

0

3

1



3

0

3

1



1

.





.8

NO



NO



NO

NO

NO



10.%

80.0%

YES

YES

1

8

6%

NO

<1%

NO

YES

Yes



YES

.

0

.

0

1.

0

0

0





1

1



1



3

0

0

0

1

1



1.

0.

.6

0

3

0

3

0

0

3



8

1

1

3

1



3

0.

3

1



1

3

3



.0

Greenpeace International l Green Electronics: the search continues l Results, Green Electronics Survey l December 2008  l 

Computer monitors

The highest-scoring product across all product categories is a

monitor. The Lenovo L2440x wide is the first computer monitor to

be free of PVC and BFRs, albeit using a limit of 900ppm chlorine

and bromine. It is also free of beryllium, phthalates and antimony.

Its weakest link in a very strong chemicals score is the five RoHS

exemptions it still uses. It almost reaches the 7-points mark and is

far ahead if its competitors.

The Fujitsu Siemens SCENICVIEW P22W-5 Eco is the runner-up

and scores special points for zero watt power use in sleep and off

modes. It is also the only model equipped with a hard-off switch.

Criteria

Chemicals

PVC-free

PVC-containing parts

BFR-free

BFR-containing parts

Antimon-free

Phthalate-free

Beryllium-free

The Samsung 2443BW reaches third place and together with

the LG Electronics W2252TE exceeds the Energy Star minimum

qualification criteria by 50% in most power modes. Three models,

RoHS exemptions used

Energy use

the winning Lenovo, the HP L1950 in fifth place and the Dell

On-mode % better than Energy star

E2009W in sixth, get innovation points for using significant (at

least 20%) post-consumer plastic sources. The Lenovo also uses

LED backlights.

Sleep-mode % better than Energy Star

Off-mode % better than Energy Star

Hard-off switch

Power-saving information

Lifecycle



3



3

3

3

3

11

8

8

8

1



Maximum
points

Lenovo L0x wide

Samsung 3BW

LG WTE

HP L10g

Dell  E00W

Acer V1HQ

Fujitsu Siemens

SCENICVIEW

PW- ECO

Results

Points

Results

Points

Results

Points

Results

Points

Results

Points

Results

Points

Results

Points

Combining

greenest

parts from

products

submitted

YES

n/a

YES

n/a

YES

YES

YES



.6%

.%

60%

NO

YES

36

3,6,6

3



0%

NO

8

NO

YES

NO

0

YES





n/a



n/a

3

3

3

6



8

8

0



n/a

36

n/a

n/a

1

n/a

36

n/a

36

n/a

1

n/a

n/a

3





3

0

3

0

1

0

0

3

1

.

3.

3.

1.8

.

1.8

.

n/a

33.%

no energy

no energy

use

use

YES

YES

NO

NO

3

3

NO

NO

YES



1,,

3



%

NO

0

NO

NO

YES

0

3

0

0



0

0

3





8

8

1







3

0

0

0

0

0



1.

6.33

6.1%

NO

NO





NO

NO

NO



0%

0%

NO

YES

0,3.0

6

1



81%

NO

0

NO

YES

YES





.

.

0

0

0

0

0





8

8

0



3

1





0

3

0



1

0

.

0.

.8

YES

1.

YES

NO

NO



3

NO

NO

NO



.%

8.0%

0.0%

NO

YES

1,,





1%

NO

8.

NO

YES

YES

NO





0

0



0

0

0



8

8

8

0

3

1

3



3

0

1

0



1



0

1

.

n/a

NO

NO

3

1

NO

NO

NO

8

3.8%

68%

%

NO

YES

1,1,3

3



%

NO



NO

YES

NO

YES

0



0

0

3

0

0

0

3



8

6

0







3

0

3

0

1

0

0



0.

.8

NO

NO

3



NO

NO

NO

6

8.0%

6.%

3%

NO

YES

3



8%

NO

8

NO

YES

NO

YES

0



1.8

.

0

0

0

0

0





8

8

0



0







0

3

0



0

0



1

NO

NO





NO

NO

YES

6

.8%

66.%

.0%

NO

YES

1

3

%

0

NO

YES

NO

NO

0

3

6,6,n/a

6, n/a, n/a

0

0

0

0

3





8



0

1

0

1

3

3

0

0

1

0

0

0

partly

0.

0.

.

1.

8.60

1.

.





3

3

3



8

8

8

1







3

3

0



1

3

Pixel defect warranty (months)

n/a

Pixel defects replacement policy
(bright, dark, sub)

Warranty in years

Components availabillity in years

WEEE recyclability rate (%)

Independent assessment for recyclability
rate provided

Recycled plastic weight %

Plastic part coded at < grams

Take-back programme and information

Other

Energy in production tracked?

Parts of production chain included?

Other special features

Visibility on web







3

1

3

1

3

1

3

3

3

6  l Greenpeace International l Green Electronics: the search continues l Results, Green Electronics Survey l December 2008

Total adjusted points

10

6.0

.

.13

i

n
o
s
v
a
D
e
t
a
K
/

e
c
a
e
p
n
e
e
r
G
©

RoHS exemptions used

11

Criteria

Chemicals

PVC-free

BFR-free

PVC-containing parts

BFR-containing parts

Antimon-free

Phthalate-free

Beryllium-free

Energy use

On-mode % better than Energy star

Sleep-mode % better than Energy Star

Off-mode % better than Energy Star

Hard-off switch

Power-saving information

Lifecycle

Pixel defects replacement policy

(bright, dark, sub)

Warranty in years

Components availabillity in years

WEEE recyclability rate (%)

Independent assessment for recyclability

rate provided

Recycled plastic weight %

Plastic part coded at < grams

Other

Energy in production tracked?

Parts of production chain included?

Other special features

Visibility on web



3



3

3

3

3

8

8

8

1









3

1

3

1

3

1

3

3

3

.6%

.%

YES

n/a

YES

n/a

YES

YES

YES



60%

NO

YES

36

3,6,6

3



0%

NO

8

NO

YES

NO

YES

0



n/a

n/a





3

3

3

6



8

8

0



3





3

0

3

0

1

0

0

3

1

Maximum

points

Lenovo L0x wide

Fujitsu Siemens
SCENICVIEW
PW- ECO

Samsung 3BW

LG WTE

HP L10g

Dell  E00W

Acer V1HQ

Results

Points

Results

Points

Results

Points

Results

Points

Results

Points

Results

Points

Results

Points

Combining
greenest
parts from
products
submitted

NO

3

NO

3

NO

NO

YES



33.%

no energy
use

no energy
use

YES

YES

0

1.8

0



0

0

3





8

8

1

.

NO



NO



NO

NO

NO



6.1%

0%

0%

NO

YES

0

.

0

.

0

0

0





8

8

0



NO



NO

3

NO

NO

NO



.%

8.0%

0.0%

NO

YES

0

.

0



0

0

0



8

8

8

0

3

NO

3

NO

1

NO

NO

NO

8

3.8%

68%

%

NO

YES

0

1.8

0

3

0

0

0

3



8

6

0

3.

NO

3

NO



NO

NO

NO

6

8.0%

6.%

3%

NO

YES

0

1.8

0

.

0

0

0





8

8

0



NO



NO



NO

NO

YES

6

.8%

66.%

.0%

NO

YES

0

.

0

.

0

0

3





8



0

1



n/a



n/a

3

3

3



8

8

8

1

3.

Pixel defect warranty (months)

n/a

n/a

36

n/a

6

n/a

1

n/a

36

n/a

36

n/a

1

n/a

n/a

1,,

3



%

NO

0

NO







3

0

0

0

0,3.0

1



81%

NO

0

NO

Take-back programme and information

YES

1.

YES

Total adjusted points

10

6.0

NO

0

YES

3

0

0



1.

6.33

YES



YES



3

1





0

3

0



1

.

0

0.

.8

1,,





1%

NO

8.

NO

YES

YES



NO



1

3



3

0

1

0



1



0

1

.

1,1,3

3



%

NO



NO

YES

NO

0

YES









3

0

3

0

1

0

0



0.

.8

6,6,n/a

3



8%

NO

8

NO

YES

NO

0

YES



0







0

3

0



0

0



1

.13

6, n/a, n/a

1

3

%

0

1

3

3







3

partly

0.

0.

0

NO

YES

NO

0

NO

3

0

0

1

0

0

0

1.

.

3

0



1

.

3

1.

8.60

Greenpeace International l Green Electronics: the search continues l Results, Green Electronics Survey l December 2008  l 

Greenpeace is an independent global
campaigning organisation that acts
to change attitudes and behaviour,
to protect and conserve the
environment and to
promote peace.

Greenpeace International
Ottho Heldringstraat 5
1066 AZ Amsterdam
The Netherlands
Tel: +31 20 7182000
Fax: +31 20 7182002

greenpeace.org

