# In the Dark: How Social Media Companies’ Climate Disinformation Problem is Hidden from the Public

Published: April 21, 2022

![InTheDark_Hero_Logos4](https://storage.googleapis.com/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/bce155d0-inthedark_hero_logos4.png)

## Executive Summary

For decades, [the fossil fuel industry has poured millions of dollars into
spreading climate
disinformation](https://www.washingtonpost.com/outlook/2019/01/10/how-fossil-
fuel-industry-got-media-think-climate-change-was-debatable/)[1] online and
offline to [drive public polarization and stall
action](https://www.latimes.com/opinion/story/2022-03-07/climate-
misinformation) on the climate crisis. That’s why the [latest UN Climate
Reports](https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg3) say [climate
disinformation](https://www.desmog.com/2022/02/28/ipcc-report-calls-out-
vested-interests-delaying-climate-action/) is a threat to climate action.

**A new scorecard by[Friends of the Earth](https://www.foe.org),
[Avaaz](https://secure.avaaz.org/page/en/), and [Greenpeace
USA](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa) shows that social media companies are
largely leaving the public in the dark about their efforts to combat the
problem. There is a gross lack of transparency, as these companies conceal
much of the data about the prevalence of digital climate dis/misinformation
and any internal measures taken to address its spread. Pinterest and YouTube
have taken notable steps to address climate dis/misinformation, while
Facebook, TikTok, and Twitter trail behind in their efforts.**

All of the social media companies fail to disclose comprehensive policies to
combat climate dis/misinformation, including:

  * Releasing weekly transparency reports that detail the scale and prevalence of climate dis/misinformation on their platforms and mitigation efforts taken internally;
  * Providing thorough and consistent detail for the courses of action they take on repeat violators of their policies, especially in the context of climate dis/misinformation.

But some have done more than others:

  * Pinterest and YouTube have adopted climate expert-informed definitions of climate dis/misinformation, while Facebook, TikTok, and Twitter have not.

We used a 27-point assessment question system to analyze climate
dis/misinformation policies at Facebook, Pinterest, TikTok, Twitter, and
YouTube.

* * *

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-stateless/2024/11/093b98ad-
climate_disinfo_chart_final_041822-1-3.png)

* * *

The findings of this assessment reinforce the need for lawmakers throughout
the world to pass [robust regulation](https://techpolicy.press/reps-trahan-
schiff-casten-introduce-digital-services-oversight-and-safety-act/) such as
[the Digital Services Oversight and Safety Act
(DSOSA)](https://www.nytimes.com/2021/12/11/business/congress-tech-
regulation.html), which would mandate transparency from social media
companies. Dis/misinformation experts have noted that transparency is key to
[better
understanding](https://www.washingtonpost.com/outlook/2021/10/05/facebook-
research-data-haugen-congress-regulation/) the evolving landscape of climate
dis/misinformation, holding disinformers accountable, and [ultimately ending
the climate crisis](https://www.thenation.com/article/environment/climate-
disinformation-pr/). Currently, these companies do not provide the data
transparency researchers and advocates need to understand the scale and harms
of climate dis/misinformation on social media, leaving the public powerless to
judge whether social media companies are acting responsibly in designing and
building their platforms.[/vc_column_text][/vc_column][/vc_row][vc_row
el_id=”background”][vc_column][vc_column_text]

## **Background**

Despite half of [US](https://techcrunch.com/2021/01/12/study-finds-around-one-
third-of-americans-regularly-get-their-news-from-
facebook/?guccounter=2&guce_referrer=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuZ2xvYmFsd2l0bmVzcy5vcmcv&guce_referrer_sig=AQAAAECa-
cCGOFw9cV-
bLLvy1MwTz743jZY8MtwNKYbhWokhOgt7r2i3dlDq8uDPY9m0URFnWGh5GlJ428h_geuSk5A1FQnLeEayqARe4noK2bSlatqC5aSOJb6le2tXPZ1rU2gFmqjgy8pU8p-ICYtFqMNCSeDA6nrBLwKmXtc2MzfK)
and [UK](https://www.ofcom.org.uk/__data/assets/pdf_file/0025/222478/news-
consumption-in-the-uk-overview-of-findings-2021.pdf) adults getting their news
from social media, social media companies have not taken the steps necessary
to fight [industry-backed
deception](https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2021/aug/05/facebook-
fossil-fuel-industry-environment-climate-change) – in fact, they continue to
[allow](https://secure.avaaz.org/campaign/en/climate_briefing_report/) these
[climate lies](https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-60905348) to [pollute
users’
feeds](https://www.counterhate.com/_files/ugd/f4d9b9_2da34b078cbe43b6820297e3a3113f69.pdf).

Their publicly available policies and reports show that they’re failing to
keep up with the [evolving tactics of climate
disinformers](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2018AGUFMPA42C..10W/abstract).
As mounting scientific evidence has made the greenhouse effect [impossible to
deny](https://www.climatesignals.org/fingerprints-everywhere-2018),
disinformers have shifted to admitting that climate change is real, but are
still pushing narratives that undermine and oppose policy action. Adopting a
“Global warming is not a hoax, but…” stance allows disinformers to appear as
moderate interlocutors in debates about climate change while [pushing for
similar policy outcomes](https://www.vox.com/science-and-
health/2017/2/2/14478566/tillerson-climate-lukewarmer). These policy positions
are often supported by [outright falsehoods, cherry-picked data, and
misleading claims](https://www.lse.ac.uk/granthaminstitute/news/why-being-
right-is-not-enough-for-climate-researchers/).

In the European Union, there is significant movement towards regulating Big
Tech, including requiring transparency on their content policies and
practices. The Digital Services Act (DSA) is currently under negotiation and
[expected to pass Parliament](https://www.reuters.com/technology/deal-eu-tech-
rules-possible-by-june-key-lawmaker-says-2022-02-14/) in June 2022. It will
likely establish a legal standard for tech company responsibility that [sets
global expectations in the same
way](https://www.euractiv.com/section/digital/news/global-view-key-in-
assessing-dsa-impacts-say-stakeholders/) that Europe’s General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR) changed standards for data protection. In the US,
Representative Lori Trahan (MA-03) [has introduced the Digital Services
Oversight and Safety Act (DSOSA)
bill](https://trahan.house.gov/news/documentsingle.aspx?DocumentID=2392),
which will empower analysts and advocates working to reduce climate
dis/misinformation by requiring transparency from social media companies and
mandating that they facilitate independent research into the social and
political consequences of platform design. Both of these key legislative
pushes underline [the
need](https://www.ft.com/content/12c6e100-a4c8-485d-8768-1b97578a79fe) for
transparency and social media company accountability in order to mitigate the
[harms that result from Big Tech’s business
model](https://www.technologyreview.com/2021/01/10/1015934/facebook-twitter-
youtube-big-tech-attention-economy-reform/) and reinforce [the need for
transparency](https://www.ft.com/content/12c6e100-a4c8-485d-8768-1b97578a79fe)
on urgent issues like climate dis/misinformation until comprehensive
regulation is in place.

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/2ea4367e-fakenews.png)[/vc_column_text][/vc_column][/vc_row][vc_row
el_id=”social-media-company-rankings”][vc_column][vc_column_text
css=”.vc_custom_1650504181963{padding-right: 10px !important;}”]

## **Social Media Company Rankings**

Based on an assessment of official, publicly-available company reports and
policy announcements[2],[3] (as of April 8, 2022), Avaaz, Friends of the
Earth, and Greenpeace USA found that Facebook, Pinterest, TikTok, Twitter, and
YouTube fall short of disclosing comprehensive policies to combat climate
dis/misinformation.

We created 27 “yes or no” [assessment
questions](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/13svriXfYAutHvSVYIkGesp0NBTVVLQaxCXtRJZm1E_Y/edit#gid=1925514409)
that, in sum, emphasize the scope of detail we believe would uphold the level
of transparency social media companies should achieve in order for
researchers, policymakers and the public to track climate dis/misinformation,
and hold social media companies accountable for their role in its spread.[4]
We then gathered all public-facing community guidelines, terms of service,
press releases, and reporting from the five social media companies relevant to
dis/misinformation and climate dis/misinformation specifically. For each
assessment question the social media company earned 1 point if it demonstrated
transparency on the policy or effort being evaluated for at least one category
of dis/misinformation. If a social media company had no official policy or
effort OR only a partial or opaque articulation of such a policy or effort, no
point was granted.

### While there is no universally accepted definition of dis/misinformation we
used the following definitions for the purposes of our research[5]:

> **“Disinformation”** describes any verifiably false or misleading content
> that is spread with the intention to deceive or secure economic or political
> gain, and which has the potential to cause public harm.

> **“Misinformation”** describes verifiably false or misleading content that
> is shared without harmful intent, though the effects can still be harmful.

* * *

**![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/093b98ad-climate_disinfo_chart_final_041822-1-3.png)**

* * *

**With the exception of Pinterest and YouTube, all social media companies fail
to adopt a climate expert-informed definition of climate dis/misinformation**
, which is integral [to ensuring that platforms’ policies and enforcement
practices](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1WPsLNh_KSBg7wOydwtf1Y0creXPGt-
BVlEAMJIGeR8k/edit) address the fullest scope of the problem. Pinterest is the
only social media company that [publicly
articulates](https://newsroom.pinterest.com/en/post/combating-climate-
misinformation-on-pinterest) an expert-informed definition that applies to
both paid and organic content, while YouTube articulates a definition only as
it applies to paid content (advertising).[6]

**Across the board, social media companies fail to release weekly transparency
reports that detail the scale and prevalence of climate dis/misinformation on
the platform and mitigation efforts taken internally.** All social media
companies have the resources to issue reports at this frequency and scope[7],
which would give the public [a greater ability to
monitor](https://static1.squarespace.com/static/614cbb3258c5c87026497577/t/617834d31bcf2c5ac4c07494/1635267795944/Metrics+and+Transparency+-+Summary+%28EXTERNAL%29.pdf)
the rapidly evolving dis/misinformation landscape and assess what measures are
most effectively addressing it. Enforcement reporting on key issues such as
climate dis/misinformation is important so that outside observers can monitor
and flag the spread of potentially harmful content if and when internal
systems fail, as was recently
[reported](https://www.theverge.com/2022/3/31/23004326/facebook-news-feed-
downranking-integrity-bug) on Facebook.

Furthermore, while all platforms except Twitter allow all users to flag and
report dis/misinformation for review and likely action by content moderators,
the platforms are vague about how they follow up to alert users of what
actions were taken or not taken on the flagged content and actors.

The Center for Countering Digital Hate has
[documented](https://www.counterhate.com/_files/ugd/f4d9b9_2da34b078cbe43b6820297e3a3113f69.pdf)
that repeat violators of dis/misinformation policies fuel the majority of
climate denial on social platforms. Despite this, **all the social media
companies we analyzed fail to provide thorough and consistent detail
describing the courses of action they take to address repeat violators of
their policies, especially in the context of climate dis/misinformation**.
[TikTok](https://www.tiktok.com/community-guidelines?lang=en) and
[YouTube](https://support.google.com/youtube/answer/2802032?hl=en) are
explicit that repeat violators of their overarching dis/misinformation
policies will face likely suspension or removal, while Facebook is the only
social media company [that explicitly
references](https://sustainability.fb.com/blog/2021/11/01/facebooks-role-in-
empowering-people-with-information-about-the-climate-crisis/) how it penalizes
repeat policy violators of its dis/misinformation policies as it relates to
climate-related content.

All social media companies have
[explicit](https://policy.pinterest.com/en/community-guidelines#sub-section-
misinformation)
[language](https://support.google.com/youtube/answer/2801939?hl=en)
[prohibiting](https://transparency.fb.com/policies/community-standards/hate-
speech/) [racist](https://www.tiktok.com/community-guidelines?lang=en#35) and
[misogynistic](https://help.twitter.com/en/rules-and-policies/hateful-conduct-
policy) content and/or imagery. Due to increasingly prominent climate-fueled
[racist](https://www.motherjones.com/politics/2020/03/timber-unity-racism/) or
[misogynistic](https://www.breitbart.com/europe/2019/08/16/delingpole-greta-
thunberg-patron-saint-of-the-age-of-stupidity/) content, it is important for
social media companies to ensure that this prohibition is rigorously enforced
against climate disinformation that contains misogynistic, racist, and
otherwise discriminatory elements.

* * *

### **#1 Pinterest is the only social media company to provide a robust
definition of climate dis/misinformation that applies to both paid and organic
content.**

  * Pinterest is one of two social media companies analyzed that provides a climate-expert-informed [definition](https://newsroom.pinterest.com/en/post/combating-climate-misinformation-on-pinterest) of climate dis/misinformation.
  * Pinterest also explicitly articulates how its anti-dis/misinformation policy enforcement will [apply to climate dis/misinformation specifically](https://newsroom.pinterest.com/en/post/combating-climate-misinformation-on-pinterest).
  * Pinterest’s process for reviewing dis/misinformation, including climate-specific dis/misinformation, is inadequately [disclosed](https://policy.pinterest.com/en/transparency-report) and vaguely described. Furthermore, the company [states](https://policy.pinterest.com/en/community-guidelines) they “may remove, limit, or block the distribution” of accounts that repeatedly violate their Community Guidelines, which is non-committal language that creates opacity around how this policy is enforced.

* * *

### **#1 YouTube articulates a climate dis/misinformation definition only as
it relates to paid advertising, which leaves the public in the dark as to how
it applies to other content.**

  * While YouTube is clear on the [internal process](https://blog.youtube/inside-youtube/on-youtubes-recommendation-system/) through which it categorizes content dis/misinformation, the social media company is vague about how widely and consistently dis/misinformation counter-measures are [enforced](https://transparencyreport.google.com/youtube-policy/removals).
  * YouTube has articulated a climate dis/misinformation [definition](https://support.google.com/google-ads/answer/11221321?hl=en) and policy that only applies to monetized videos and paid advertising.
  * YouTube provides a [target rate](https://www.youtube.com/howyoutubeworks/our-commitments/managing-harmful-content/#reduce) for the prevalence of [“borderline content”](https://blog.youtube/inside-youtube/on-youtubes-recommendation-system/) in recommendations but does not remove it, nor disclose whether they consistently meet this target in enforcement reports. “Borderline content” is [defined](https://blog.youtube/inside-youtube/on-youtubes-recommendation-system/) as content that doesn’t quite violate [Youtube Community Guidelines](https://support.google.com/youtube/answer/10834785) and encompasses many categories of dis/misinformation.

* * *

### **#3 Facebook is
[explicit](https://sustainability.fb.com/blog/2021/11/01/facebooks-role-in-
empowering-people-with-information-about-the-climate-crisis/) about how fact-
checking and downranking measures are applied to climate dis/misinformation
and its regular spreaders, but it provides [little
information](https://transparency.fb.com/data/community-standards-
enforcement/) on disclosure of enforcement outcomes.**

  * While Facebook articulates how content is verified as dis/misinformation through their [third-party fact-checking program](https://www.facebook.com/journalismproject/programs/third-party-fact-checking), there is little clarity around how widely and consistently dis/misinformation measures are applied.
  * Facebook doesn’t release updates on the scale and prevalence of climate dis/misinformation in its [quarterly enforcement reports](https://transparency.fb.com/data/community-standards-enforcement/), or on climate dis/misinformation in general.
  * Facebook has not released a publicly available [definition](https://sustainability.fb.com/blog/2021/11/01/facebooks-role-in-empowering-people-with-information-about-the-climate-crisis/) of climate dis/misinformation.

* * *

### **#4 TikTok has clear standards for removing repeat offenders and includes
dis/misinformation in their transparency reports, but does not articulate how
any policies apply to climate dis/misinformation.**

  * TikTok has transparent user flagging [policies](https://newsroom.tiktok.com/en-au/tiktok-partners-with-fact-checking-experts-to-combat-misinformation), and the social media company [clearly articulates](https://www.tiktok.com/community-guidelines?lang=en#37) that repeat violators of their Community Guidelines face account-level consequences for spreading dis/misinformation.
  * TikTok is [transparent](https://newsroom.tiktok.com/en-us/building-to-support-integrity) on the process for identifying mis/disinformation on its platform.
  * While TikTok’s [quarterly enforcement reports](https://www.tiktok.com/transparency/en/reports/) include high-level metrics on actions taken on dis/misinformation, these reports do not include detail on actions taken specifically on climate dis/misinformation.
  * TikTok has not published a publicly available [definition](https://newsroom.tiktok.com/en-us/combating-misinformation-and-election-interference-on-tiktok) of climate dis/misinformation, nor does it refer to climate-related content throughout any of its [community guidelines](https://www.tiktok.com/community-guidelines?lang=en).
  * TikTok releases [guidelines](https://www.tiktok.com/creators/creator-portal/en-us/how-tiktok-works/whats-the-for-you-page-and-how-do-i-get-there/) for recommended content on its platform that make it clear that mis/disinformation is discouraged, but the use of qualifying language throughout the guidelines makes it difficult for users and researchers to understand whether or not policies are applied consistently.

* * *

### **#5 Twitter’s lack of clarity on dis/misinformation review policies and
vague enforcement reporting information puts it last.**

  * Twitter lost many points for qualifying language and vagueness. For example, in their [enforcement policies](https://help.twitter.com/en/rules-and-policies/enforcement-options), Twitter describes “enforcement actions that we may take” without providing clear criteria for when and why certain actions are applied or not.
  * Its strengths as a social media company came from [transparency](https://help.twitter.com/en/rules-and-policies/public-interest) on account-level exemptions to standard enforcement, and clear strike [policies](https://help.twitter.com/en/rules-and-policies/medical-misinformation-policy) for repeat offenders on some types of dis/misinformation.
  * The social media company does not articulate how its existing dis/misinformation-related policies [apply](https://help.twitter.com/en/resources/addressing-misleading-info) to climate dis/misinformation, nor does it explicitly articulate how it plans to [address](https://blog.twitter.com/en_us/topics/company/2021/-cop26-is-happening-on-twitter) climate dis/misinformation.
  * Twitter is not clear about how content is verified as dis/misinformation, nor explicit about engaging with [climate experts](https://blog.twitter.com/en_us/topics/company/2021/-cop26-is-happening-on-twitter) to review dis/misinformation policies or flagged content.
  * Twitter’s total lack of reference to climate dis/misinformation, both in their policies and throughout their [enforcement reports](https://transparency.twitter.com/en/reports/rules-enforcement.html#2021-jan-jun), earned them no points in either category.
  * The social media company has not released a publicly available [definition](https://blog.twitter.com/en_us/topics/company/2021/-cop26-is-happening-on-twitter) of climate dis/misinformation.

* * *

[/vc_column_text][/vc_column][/vc_row][vc_row
el_id=”recommendations”][vc_column][vc_column_text]

## **Recommendations**

The _Climate Disinformation Coalition_ , an intersectional group of climate
organizations and tech accountability groups (including Avaaz, Friends of the
Earth, and Greenpeace USA) has called on all social media companies to deliver
on the following[8]:

  * Establish, disclose, and enforce policies to reduce climate change dis/misinformation.
  * Release in full the company’s current labeling, fact-checking, policy review, and algorithmic ranking systems related to climate change disinformation policies.
  * Disclose weekly reports on the scale and prevalence of climate change dis/misinformation on the platform and mitigation efforts taken internally.
  * Adopt privacy and data protection policies to protect individuals and communities who may be climate dis/misinformation targets.

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/92b46b92-connections.png)[/vc_column_text][/vc_column][/vc_row][vc_row
el_id=”methodology”][vc_column][vc_column_text]

## Methodology

Between January 14, 2022 and April 8, 2022, Friends of the Earth, Avaaz, and
Greenpeace USA created specific criteria for evaluating the platforms’ climate
disinformation policies, using a list of 27 “yes or no” [assessment
questions](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/13svriXfYAutHvSVYIkGesp0NBTVVLQaxCXtRJZm1E_Y/edit#gid=1925514409)
that represent the scope and level of transparency that we believe these
companies should hold themselves to in order for researchers, policymakers,
and the public to track climate dis/misinformation, and hold social media
companies accountable for their role in its spread.[9]

We gathered all official, public-facing community guidelines, terms of
service, press releases, and reporting relevant to assessment questions from
the five social media companies. Each assessment question amounted to 1 point
if the social media company demonstrated transparency on the policy or effort
being evaluated. If a social media company had no official policy or effort OR
only a partial or qualified articulation of such a policy or effort, no point
was granted.

For questions on a social media company’s general (non-climate-specific)
dis/misinformation policy, points were awarded for transparency on
dis/misinformation policies that covered specific domains, such as COVID-19
dis/misinformation. The assessment question regarding elements within a
climate dis/misinformation definition, was worth three points total. The total
number of points available was 27.

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/1c72da12-peopleillustration.png)[/vc_column_text][/vc_column][/vc_row][vc_row
el_id=”assessment-questions”][vc_column][vc_column_text]

## **Assessment Questions**

In February, our researchers reached out to all social media companies to flag
this upcoming cross-platform analysis of transparency and content moderation
policies and to request any clarification on existing or forthcoming policies
that might be released before we concluded our assessment. Pinterest was the
only company to respond.

This report will be updated periodically in the future, based on any policy
changes, updated information, or corrections provided by the companies.

The social media companies’ policies and transparency efforts were all
evaluated with the following questions, which [reflect the recommendations
communicated to the social media
companies](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1WPsLNh_KSBg7wOydwtf1Y0creXPGt-
BVlEAMJIGeR8k/edit). A social media company was given 1 point for officially
and publicly disclosing each of the policies or information below.

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-stateless/2024/11/2510b1ca-
chart1-copy.png)Total Points: 27 points. The ranking of each social media
company was determined by the sum of points each received after the assessment
was complete.

_**DISCLAIMER:** We do not include API access or research data sharing
policies in our analysis, as this data requires significant resources and
expertise to process, and is therefore not easily accessible to policymakers
and the general public. Moreover, data accessed through major platform APIs,
including data offered by
[Facebook](https://knightcolumbia.org/content/a-safe-harbor-for-platform-
research),
[Twitter](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/2056305121988929), and
[YouTube](https://www.brookings.edu/research/how-to-fix-social-media-start-
with-independent-research/), has been revealed to be non-comprehensive,
[subject to arbitrary restriction or withdrawal by social media
companies](https://www.protocol.com/nyu-facebook-researchers-scraping), and
constrained by [data limits](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MHUGuw1Agnc) and
the [omission of deleted
content](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/2056305121988929) and other
essential information. For this reason, external researchers cannot and should
not be asked to provide a comprehensive overview of climate misinformation
easily, internally available to social media companies. However, we recognize
the importance of more open API and researcher access to hold social media
companies accountable and support the development of accessible data-sharing
protocols and rigorous auditing procedures needed to verify the enforcement of
policies covered in this
scorecard._[/vc_column_text][/vc_column][/vc_row][vc_row el_id=”final-
note”][vc_column][vc_column_text]

## **Final Note**

The organizations that created this assessment are cognizant that different
scientific models can be used to assess the effects of climate change and the
progression of associated threats over the coming decades.

One of the key objectives of this report is to allow for fact-based
deliberation, discussion and debate to flourish in an information ecosystem
that is healthy and fair, and that allows both citizens and policymakers to
make decisions based on the best available data. Past research has shown that
much of the climate dis/misinformation on social media is spread by [a small
number of actors](https://www.counterhate.com/toxicten), [often with vested
economic and political interests](https://www.desmog.com/2022/02/28/ipcc-
report-calls-out-vested-interests-delaying-climate-action/), and [amplified by
social media recommendation
algorithms](https://secure.avaaz.org/campaign/en/youtube_climate_misinformation/)
designed to maximize human attention and profit.

We see a clear boundary between freedom of speech and freedom of reach, and
believe that transparency on climate dis/misinformation and accountability for
the actors who spread it is a precondition for a robust and constructive
debate on climate change and the response to the climate
crisis.[/vc_column_text][/vc_column][/vc_row][vc_row
el_id=”references”][vc_column][vc_column_text]

## **References**

[1] When referred to in this report, “disinformation” describes any verifiably
false or misleading content that is spread with the intention to deceive or
secure economic or political gain, and which has the potential to cause public
harm. “Misinformation” describes verifiably false or misleading content that
is shared without harmful intent, though the effects have the potential to be
harmful. These definitions are informed by
[UNESCO](https://en.unesco.org/fightfakenews) and the years-long research by
the authors of this report on the dis/misinformation landscape.

When referring to climate disinformation and misinformation specifically in
this report, we are referring to deceptive or misleading content that: 1)
Undermines the existence or impacts of climate change, the unequivocal human
influence on climate change, and the need for corresponding urgent action
according to the IPCC scientific consensus and in line with the goals of the
Paris Climate Agreement; 2) Misrepresents scientific data, including by
omission or cherry-picking, in order to erode trust in climate science,
climate-focused institutions, experts, and solutions; or 3) Falsely publicizes
efforts as supportive of climate goals that in fact contribute to climate
warming or contravene the scientific consensus on mitigation or adaptation.
This definition was [developed](https://consciousadnetwork.medium.com/open-
letter-global-action-required-now-to-tackle-the-threat-of-climate-
misinformation-and-7064278b5b77) in partnership with climate and
disinformation experts.

[2] This assessment is based on official, publicly-available company reports
and policy announcements alone. This does not include comments from company
spokespeople and current or former employee leaks to the press. Avaaz, Friends
of the Earth, and Greenpeace USA believe that social media companies should
make all information relevant to policy details, enforcement measures, and
effectiveness of mitigation efforts available in the form of official company-
issued reports and policy announcements. See “Methodology” for more.

[3] See full assessment
[here](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/13svriXfYAutHvSVYIkGesp0NBTVVLQaxCXtRJZm1E_Y/edit#gid=1925514409).

[4] See “Methodology” for the list of all 27 questions used to assess the
companies’ policies and actions.

[5] These definitions are informed by
[UNESCO](https://en.unesco.org/fightfakenews) and the years-long research on
the dis/misinformation landscape by the authors of this report.

[6] <https://support.google.com/google-ads/answer/11221321?hl=en>

[7]<https://www.courant.com/opinion/op-ed/hc-op-oneil-facebook-
algorithms-20211012-u5jdwte3mfhthm3s7ecq4nvq6e-story.html>

[8] Expanded policy demands can be viewed
[here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1WPsLNh_KSBg7wOydwtf1Y0creXPGt-
BVlEAMJIGeR8k/edit).

[/vc_column_text][/vc_column][/vc_row]

