# Meet the Fourteen House Members Who Pump Most Of Our Oil

Ten Republicans and four Democrats represent the regions of the country where
the vast majority of U.S. crude oil is produced — showing why we need a just
transition away from dirty energy now.

![Pumpjack near Houses in
Colorado](https://storage.googleapis.com/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/38e42ac2-gp0stpzqd_web_size_with_credit_line.jpg)A pumpjack
oil well near homes in Dacona on the Niobara shale formation, one of the most
heavily fracked areas in the United States.

Ten Republicans and four Democrats represent the parts of the country where
the vast majority of U.S. crude oil is produced. As the 116th Congress gets
down to work, we take a look at these districts and what their Representatives
received in campaign contributions from the oil and gas industry.

There isn’t a readily available current dataset of oil and gas production
broken down by House Districts, so what follows is a rough estimate that can
hopefully be improved. Data collected by the Economic Research Service of the
USDA tabulates [oil production by county for the years 2000 to
2011](https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/county-level-oil-and-gas-
production-in-the-us/). The map below shows this county-level data for the
lower 48 states in 2011, with the boundaries of the House Districts overlaid.

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/292e15f8-map_oil2011_county.png)

© Greenpeace USA/Tim Donaghy

The map clearly shows the [major
regions](https://www.eia.gov/petroleum/drilling/#tabs-summary-2) that are the
source of the booming oil and gas production in the U.S. The dark purple
splotch in west Texas and New Mexico is the Permian basin, which has shown
rapid growth in the past decade thanks to the shale boom and is currently
seeing a [rapid build-out of pipeline
capacity](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2018-07-09/permian-pinch-
spurs-pipeline-binge-and-fears-of-overbuilding) to get its product to domestic
and international markets. Other key oil-producing basins are the Bakken (in
North Dakota, source of the controversial Dakota Access Pipeline), the Eagle
Ford (south Texas), and the Niobrara (Wyoming and Colorado). Unsurprisingly,
the geographic pattern of oil and gas extraction matches the locations of
[communities where oil and gas jobs make up a large fraction of the available
employment](https://www.bls.gov/opub/ted/2015/counties-with-highest-
concentration-of-employment-in-oil-and-gas-extraction-june-2014.htm).

However, a lot has happened since 2011. In recent years, oil production has
[increased rapidly](https://www.eia.gov/dnav/pet/pet_crd_crpdn_adc_mbbl_a.htm)
in places like the Permian, the Eagle Ford, and the Bakken, while declining in
other places. To get a (very) crude estimate for which Congressional Districts
are currently home to the most oil production we can make a few assumptions to
create the map below (see the Endnote for more details on the calculation).

We find that only 14 Congressional Districts produced roughly 80% of onshore
U.S. oil in 2017. These districts, marked in dark purple above, form a
corridor through the center of the country, stretching from Texas to North
Dakota. (Alaska’s at-large district is not shown on the map, but is one of the
14.) Together the politicians who represent these 14 districts accepted over
$1.7 million in campaign contributions from the [oil and gas industry in
2018](https://www.opensecrets.org/industries/summary.php?ind=E01&cycle=2018&recipdetail=H&mem=N).

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/4be42a37-map_oil2017est_cd_levels.png)

© Greenpeace USA/Tim Donaghy

The single House district with the highest oil production is **North Dakota’s
At-Large District** which encompasses the majority of the **Bakken** region
and which produced [390 million barrels of oil in
2017](https://www.eia.gov/petroleum/drilling/pdf/bakken.pdf).

  * North Dakota is represented by Kelly Armstrong (R) who received $217,751 in oil and gas money in 2018, placing him 10th overall in oil and gas contributions among House candidates. Former Representative Kevin Cramer (R) successfully defeated Senator Heidi Heitkamp to flip one of North Dakota’s Senate seats in 2018. Cramer raked in $417,646, placing him 4th among all Senate candidates in oil and gas contributions (Heitkamp was 5th with $363,596).

The most productive oil region in the U.S. in recent years has been the
**Permian** basin, represented by three districts in Texas and one in New
Mexico. All told, the Permian produced a whopping [890 million barrels of oil
in 2017](https://www.eia.gov/petroleum/drilling/pdf/permian.pdf), placing
these four House districts at #2, 3, 4 and 6 in our approximate rankings.

  * **Texas 23rd** : Located along the border with Mexico in southwest Texas, and represented by Will Hurd (R), who won a very narrow race over Democrat Gina Ortiz Jones. Hurd received $394,677 from the oil and gas industry — the 2nd highest total among all House candidates in 2018. In comparison, his opponent only received $11,413.
  * **Texas 11th** : This district is located to the north of the 23rd district and is represented by Mike Conaway (R), who received $113,300 from the oil and gas industry in 2018.
  * **Texas 19th** : This district is located to the north of the 11th district and is represented by Jodey Arrington (R), who received $62,100 from the oil and gas industry in 2018.
  * **New Mexico 2nd** : Representing the southeastern corner of New Mexico, Democrat Xochitl Torres Small (D) narrowly won this previously Republican-held district. Torres Small received $7,805 from the oil and gas industry, compared to $108,500 for her Republican opponent, Yvette Herrell.

In the 2018 Texas Senate race, Ted Cruz and Beto O’Rourke raised over $1
million between them from the oil and gas industry.

Following the Permian, **Alaska’s At-Large District** produced 180 million
barrels of oil in 2017, much of it from the **North Slope** oil fields.

  * Alaska has been represented by Don Young (R) for many decades, who received $84,250 in oil and gas money in 2018.

The remaining eight House districts likely produced something in the range of
50-100 million barrels of oil in 2017, including parts of the Eagle Ford,
Niobrara, Anadarko, and Central Valley oil regions.

The **Eagle Ford** stretches across eight districts in south Texas and
generated around [430 million barrels of oil in
2017](https://www.eia.gov/petroleum/drilling/pdf/eagleford.pdf). Key House
districts in this basin include:

  * **Texas 28th** : Represented by Henry Cuellar (D), who was the top Democratic recipient of oil and gas money in 2018, with $165,900.
  * **Texas 15th** : Represented by Vicente Gonzalez (D), who received $53,250
  * **Texas 34th** : Represented by Filemon Vela (D), who received $38,500

The Eagle Ford also intersects Texas’s 27th, 10th, 17th, and 8th districts, as
well as part of the 23rd district mentioned above.

The **Niobrara basin** — located in Wyoming and Colorado with some production
in western Nebraska and Kansas — produced around [170 million barrels of oil
in 2017](https://www.eia.gov/petroleum/drilling/pdf/niobrara.pdf). Key
districts include:

  * **Wyoming’s At-Large District** : Represented by Liz Cheney (R), who was recently elected Republican Party Conference Chair, and who received $82,900 in oil and gas money.
  * **Colorado 4th** : Represented by Ken Buck (R), who received $45,700.

The **Anadarko basin** is found in the “panhandle” regions of western Oklahoma
and north Texas and produced around [160 million barrels of oil in
2017](https://www.eia.gov/petroleum/drilling/pdf/anadarko.pdf). The region is
covered by two districts:

  * **Texas 13th** : Represented by Mac Thornberry (R), who received $32,125.
  * **Oklahoma 3rd** : Represented by Frank Lucas (R), who received $62,500.

California’s oil fields, stretch across several districts in the Central
Valley and Southern California, but in particular:

  * **California 23rd** : Represented by House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy (R), who was the #1 recipient of oil and gas largesse with $405,850 in contributions in 2018.

There are a lot of factors that determine how much money a candidate could
receive from the oil and gas industry, but in general, [Republicans receive
over 85% of the
contributions](https://www.opensecrets.org/industries/totals.php?cycle=2018&ind=E01).
Among House candidates receiving more than $100,000 in oil and gas money, 37
were Republicans while only two were Democrats. Unsurprisingly, competitive
races often attract more donations than safe seats, and senior House leaders
and powerful committee chairs can often command large checks from industries
they are charged with regulating.

The contribution numbers combine individual donations from oil and gas
industry employees (everyone from the CEO to drilling crews) together with
contributions from PACs and other industry organizations. Separating these two
sources of money is a topic for a future post, but it is clear that oil and
gas campaign money does correlate broadly with oil production.

However, among the top money recipients from the oil and gas industry, we do
find a number of top House Republican leaders and powerful committee chairs —
irrespective of whether they have a heavy oil and gas presence in their
district. Former House Speaker Paul Ryan was the 3rd highest recipient
(R-Wisconsin, $365,878), along with McCarthy, House Minority Whip Steve
Scalise (R-Louisiana, $324,695), former Ways and Means chair Kevin Brady
(R-Texas, $353,735), and former Energy and Commerce chair Greg Walden
(R-Oregon, $288,150). Both Ryan and Walden scored large donations despite
having little to no oil and gas production in their states.

These maps point at the two twinned problems that have so far stymied action
on climate change: the political power of the fossil fuel industry, and its
economic clout. Real climate leadership will have to promote policies that
address both of these issues — both rescuing our politics from the corrupting
influence of corporate cash, and building a transition away from dirty energy
that ensures that workers and communities in these oil districts are left
better off than before.

**Endnote:** We start with county-level oil production data from the USDA
(source: Economic Research Service (ERS). [_County-level Oil and Gas
Production in the U.S._](https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/county-level-
oil-and-gas-production-in-the-us/)). This dataset only covers the years
2000-2011, which predates much of the shale revolution, and so the patterns of
oil and gas production have likely shifted somewhat in recent years. We update
this data to 2017 by scaling each county’s production either by state-level
trends (source: [EIA Crude Oil Production by
State](https://www.eia.gov/dnav/pet/pet_crd_crpdn_adc_mbbl_a.htm)) or — in the
case of Texas, New Mexico, Oklahoma, Arkansas, and Louisiana — by basin-level
trends (source: [EIA Drilling Productivity
Report](https://www.eia.gov/petroleum/drilling/)).

Production by District is estimated by assuming that production is evenly
spread across the individual counties and which can be combined by measuring
the area overlap between county and district boundaries. County boundaries are
shown faintly in white, while district boundaries are black.

We caution that these numbers are only approximate, and further research into
state-level production data is needed for a more accurate calculation. This
post focuses on oil producing regions; for future posts, we’ll take a look at
natural gas production, as well as other aspects of the industry, such as
pipelines, refineries, and petrochemicals.

