# Packaging Away the Planet

A new Greenpeace report ranks supermarkets on their efforts to eliminate
single-use plastics.

![Malaysia](https://storage.googleapis.com/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/8455e7a7-gp0stsqbc_web_size_with_credit_line.jpg)Greenpeace
Malaysia has been conducting a field investigation on the broken system of
recycling and how it impacts Malaysian society. The findings were shocking: a
new ‘dump site’ of plastic waste from more than 19 countries — most of them
are developed countries. The investigation found illegal practices, and
blatant violations causing environmental pollution as well as harming people’s
health conditions.

Since China banned plastic waste imports in January 2018, countries in
Southeast Asia – particularly Vietnam, Thailand and Malaysia – have accepted
an increased amount of plastic waste. Between January and July 2018 alone,
Malaysia imported 754,000 metric tonnes of plastic — the weight of
approximately 100,000 large elephants. It came from countries like the United
States, Japan, UK, Australia, New Zealand, Finland, France, Belgium, Germany,
Spain, Sweden and Switzerland.

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/6cc3350c-screen-
shot-2019-06-13-at-5.44.45-pm-e1560542281717.png)

To view the report, [click
here](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/reports/packaging-away-the-planet-2019/)

[_Packaging Away the
Planet_](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/reports/packaging-away-the-
planet-2019/) evaluates 20 large U.S. grocery retailers for the first time on
their efforts to eliminate single-use plastics.

**Across the board, supermarkets are failing to adequately address the plastic
pollution crisis they are contributing to.**

ALDI, The Kroger Co., and Albertsons Companies ranked the highest, while
Meijer, Wakefern, and H-E-B ranked the worst. None of the 20 profiled
retailers achieved a passing score and none of the profiled retailers have
ambitious, comprehensive commitments commensurate with the scale of the
plastic pollution crisis.

Plastic is killing whales, seabirds, and turtles. It is overwhelming
communities and impacting human health. Globally, more than 90% of all
plastics ever produced have not been recycled, and six times more plastic
waste is burned in the U.S. than is recycled.

As policy makers and the public grow increasingly concerned about plastic
pollution, this is the moment for retailers to take a stand. Will U.S.
retailers lead in developing innovative alternatives to wasteful single-use
packaging, or continue to make current and future generations pay the price
for their complacency?

Find out if your supermarket is starting to take responsibility for its role
in this crisis. Check out the scorecard and report below.

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/1425919f-scorecard_online.jpg)

**To read the full report,[_click
here_](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/reports/packaging-away-the-
planet-2019/).**

**To view the scorecard,[_click
here_](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/12/56165480-2019-supermarket-plastics-scorecard.png).**

