# President Biden’s 100 Day Climate Progress Report

Has President Biden met the bar for real climate leadership in his first 100
days? We graded the Administration’s progress toward phasing out fossil fuels
and enacting a Green New Deal, based on our #Climate2020 Scorecard.

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-stateless/2024/11/71efdcff-
social1_tw_1024x512_v2.png)

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/7ee9b898-overall-progress-e1619559615812.png)

Numerical metrics are based on the following “progress bar” that represents
steps toward full implementation, with weightings
[derived](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1HIi4iCw2EuaO0B7X_J-e7cZlAuyzMba2vFUwA1GF6gQ/edit)
from the #Climate2020 Scorecard.
![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/d076ac3f-scorecard-key.png)

## Phasing Out Fossil Fuels

### 1\. Lead a Managed Fossil Fuel Phase Out

_Has President Biden initiated a managed phase out of domestic fossil fuel
production, both federal and non-federal, before 2050?_

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/195af607-scorecard-poff-1-1.png)

The U.S. [must phase out fossil fuel
production](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-phaseout/) as
quickly as possible to meet global climate targets. During the campaign, Joe
Biden offered some rhetoric in support of a phase out of fossil fuel
production. Kamala Harris went even further, proposing an international
agreement to address fossil fuel production. However, so far the Biden-Harris
Administration has not implemented policies to phase out fossil fuel
production.

### 2\. Protect Workers & Communities

_Has President Biden enacted policies to support workers and communities that
are economically dependent on the fossil fuel industry during the transition
to a 100% renewable energy future, ensuring that nobody is left behind?_

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/9b04ef7b-ffsc-2.png)

President Biden’s January 27th [Executive Order on Tackling the Climate Crisis
at Home and Abroad](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-
actions/2021/01/27/executive-order-on-tackling-the-climate-crisis-at-home-and-
abroad/) identifies the need for federal leadership to “foster economic
revitalization of and investment in” energy communities. The EO mentions the
importance of creating jobs reducing emissions from abandoned wells and mines,
and creates an Interagency Working Group on Coal and Power Plant Communities
and Economic Revitalization. The Working Group has presented an [initial
report](https://netl.doe.gov/IWGInitialReport), but no policies have been
implemented yet. President Biden’s proposed [American Jobs
Plan](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-
releases/2021/03/31/fact-sheet-the-american-jobs-plan/) (AJP) also contains
proposals to support workforce development, invest $16 billion to create union
jobs cleaning up abandoned oil and gas wells and coal, hardrock, and uranium
mines, and create a Community Revitalization Fund. Enacting the AJP and/or
implementing specific provisions of the Climate EO will move the progress bar
closer to completion.

### 3\. End Fossil Fuel Leasing

_Has President Biden ended new fossil fuel leasing on public lands and
waters?_

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/9074a506-ffsc-3.png)

President Biden’s [Climate EO](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-
room/presidential-actions/2021/01/27/executive-order-on-tackling-the-climate-
crisis-at-home-and-abroad/) implemented a temporary pause on “new oil and
natural gas leases on public lands or in offshore waters pending completion of
a comprehensive review.” This leasing moratorium does not cover coal leasing
and may not be made permanent following the Interior Department’s review. Full
credit would be awarded for a permanent and comprehensive halt to coal, oil,
and gas production on federal lands and waters.

### 4\. End Fossil Fuel Subsidies

_Has President Biden eliminated federal fossil fuel subsidies?_

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/a0f8cc33-poff-4.png)

The Biden-Harris Administration has supported ending some fossil fuel
subsidies. President Biden’s [Climate EO](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-
room/presidential-actions/2021/01/27/executive-order-on-tackling-the-climate-
crisis-at-home-and-abroad/) instructs the government to “take steps to ensure
that, to the extent consistent with applicable law, Federal funding is not
directly subsidizing fossil fuels.” However, his Made in America Tax Plan
would [only remove $35 billion](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/news/bidens-
tax-plan-comes-up-short-on-fossil-fuel-subsidies-greenpeace-response/) in
subsidies over the next decade, far less than the estimated $150 billion in
U.S. federal fossil fuel subsidies identified in the End Polluter Welfare Act.
On April 22, 2021, President Biden [instructed
agencies](https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-
content/uploads/2021/04/U.S.-International-Climate-Finance-
Plan-4.22.21-Updated-Spacing.pdf) to “seek to end international investments in
and support for carbon-intensive fossil fuel-based energy projects,” although
it remains unclear how comprehensive or effective these policies will be.

### 5\. Ban Fossil Fuel Exports

_Has President Biden banned exports of crude oil, coal, and liquified natural
gas (LNG)?_

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/ca4ec538-poff-5.png)

The Biden-Harris Administration has not taken any action so far to halt crude
oil, coal, or liquified natural gas exports, as a new coalition of climate,
environmental justice, and public health groups [are
demanding](http://stopfossilfuelexports.org).

### 6\. Implement a Climate Test for Fossil Fuel Infrastructure

_Has President Biden denied all federal permits for fossil fuel projects that
would increase climate pollution?_

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/a0f8cc33-poff-4.png)

President Biden revoked the permit for the Keystone XL pipeline, but has not
yet taken further action to halt federal permits for fossil fuel and other
infrastructure permits that would exacerbate the climate crisis. His [Climate
EO](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-
actions/2021/01/27/executive-order-on-tackling-the-climate-crisis-at-home-and-
abroad/) aims to “ensure that Federal infrastructure investment reduces
climate pollution, and to require that Federal permitting decisions consider
the effects of greenhouse gas emissions and climate change,” but it is unclear
exactly what this will mean in practice. President Biden’s “[Executive Order
on Protecting Public Health and the Environment and Restoring Science to
Tackle the Climate Crisis](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-
room/presidential-actions/2021/01/20/executive-order-protecting-public-health-
and-environment-and-restoring-science-to-tackle-climate-crisis/)” also
mandates that agencies “capture the full costs of greenhouse gas emissions as
accurately as possible” by using the social cost of carbon (SCC), which could
be one step toward fully accounting for the climate costs of polluting
infrastructure.

### 7\. Hold Polluters Accountable

_Has President Biden held fossil fuel polluters accountable for the costs of
climate disaster?_

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/752b1f48-poff-7.png)

**Justification** : President Biden’s [Climate
EO](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-
actions/2021/01/27/executive-order-on-tackling-the-climate-crisis-at-home-and-
abroad/) states, “We must hold polluters accountable for their actions,” but
to date the Biden-Harris Administration has not taken concrete action to do
so.

### 8\. Respect Indigenous Sovereignty

_Has President Biden upheld Indigenous peoples’ rights to self-determination,
free, prior, and informed consent (e.g., for fossil fuel projects on
Indigenous territories), and other rights as laid out in the United Nations
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples?_

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/e1a0809b-poff-8.png)

President Biden released a “[Memorandum on Tribal Consultation and
Strengthening Nation-to-Nation
Relationships](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-
actions/2021/01/26/memorandum-on-tribal-consultation-and-strengthening-nation-
to-nation-relationships/)” that mandates each agency develop a plan for
nation-to-nation consultation. This Memo mostly returns Federal practices with
respect to Tribes to Obama-era precedents, and does not institute Free, Prior,
and Informed Consent. President Biden has not spoken publicly about supporting
the U.N. Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.

### 9\. Advance Environmental Justice

_Has President Biden combatted the racial, economic, and environmental
injustices that have led working families and people of color to bear the
brunt of fossil fuel and toxic pollution, and worked to foster healthy,
sustainable, and regenerative communities?_

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/b914fd4c-poff-9.png)

President Biden’s [Climate EO](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-
room/presidential-actions/2021/01/27/executive-order-on-tackling-the-climate-
crisis-at-home-and-abroad/) mandates the creation of a White House
Environmental Justice Interagency Council, which is charged with developing a
“strategy to address current and historic environmental injustice.” The EO
also tasks the Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) with creating an equity
mapping tool, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the Department of
Justice (DOJ) with tightening enforcement of violations with disproportionate
impact, and the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) with developing
a focus on health equity. The EO also kicked off the Administration’s
“Justice40 Initiative,” with a [goal](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-
room/statements-releases/2021/01/27/fact-sheet-president-biden-takes-
executive-actions-to-tackle-the-climate-crisis-at-home-and-abroad-create-jobs-
and-restore-scientific-integrity-across-federal-government/) of “delivering 40
percent of the overall benefits of relevant federal investments to
disadvantaged communities.”

### 10\. Appoint a Fossil Fuel Free Administration

_Has President Biden nominated, appointed, and hired Administration officials
free from the influence of fossil fuel corporations, executives, and
lobbyists?_

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/6e115e0d-poff-10.png)

President Biden appointed a Cabinet free from overt fossil fuel influence and
implemented a White House [Ethics Pledge](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-
room/presidential-actions/2021/01/20/executive-order-ethics-commitments-by-
executive-branch-personnel/) with [strong revolving door
provisions](https://www.citizensforethics.org/reports-investigations/crew-
reports/biden-ethics-pledge-compared-obama-trump/). Despite these pledges,
however, there do [remain members of the Administration with significant
financial investments and career
ties](https://therevolvingdoorproject.org/financial-disclosures-reveal-fossil-
fuel-industrys-pipeline-to-the-white-house/) to fossil fuel corporations.

# Advancing a Green New Deal

### 1\. Support a Green New Deal

_Has President Biden supported the Green New Deal (GND), as proposed by Sen.
Markey and Rep. Ocasio-Cortez, or the THRIVE Agenda, which calls for a GND-
style economic recovery?_

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/e1a0809b-poff-8.png)

President Biden has not publicly supported nor enacted the [GND
Resolution](https://www.congress.gov/bill/116th-congress/house-
resolution/109/text) or [THRIVE Agenda](https://www.thriveagenda.com/).
However, President Biden’s proposed [American Jobs
Plan](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-
releases/2021/03/31/fact-sheet-the-american-jobs-plan/) (AJP) and some of his
public statements do capture the spirit of the original GND. The GND marked a
turning point in the U.S. climate policy debate, bringing a much greater focus
on a holistic approach to devote trillions in public investments to create
millions of good-paying, union jobs, tackle the climate crisis, and address
historical environmental, racial, and economic injustices. The AJP marks a
step forward in making this vision a reality.

### 2\. Commit to Near-Zero Greenhouse Gas Emissions Before 2050

_Has President Biden required near-zero U.S. greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions
earlier than 2050?_

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/e1a0809b-poff-8.png)

President Biden’s [Climate EO](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-
room/presidential-actions/2021/01/27/executive-order-on-tackling-the-climate-
crisis-at-home-and-abroad/) notes the promise of solutions to “put the United
States on a path to achieve net-zero emissions, economy-wide, by no later than
2050,” but stops short of formally pledging this as a target. On April 22,
2021, President Biden [announced](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-
room/statements-releases/2021/04/22/fact-sheet-president-biden-
sets-2030-greenhouse-gas-pollution-reduction-target-aimed-at-creating-good-
paying-union-jobs-and-securing-u-s-leadership-on-clean-energy-technologies/) a
new nationally determined contribution (NDC) under the Paris Agreement that
affirms the Administration’s goal of “reaching net zero emissions economy-wide
by no later than 2050.”

### 3\. Rejoin the Paris Agreement

_Has President Biden supported the U.S. remaining a party to the Paris
Agreement?_

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-stateless/2024/11/c1b744cd-
gnd-5.5.png)

On January 20, 2021, President Biden [took action to re-
enter](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-
releases/2021/01/20/paris-climate-agreement/) the Paris Climate Agreement, and
on April 22, 2021 announced a [stronger nationally determined
contribution](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-
releases/2021/04/22/fact-sheet-president-biden-sets-2030-greenhouse-gas-
pollution-reduction-target-aimed-at-creating-good-paying-union-jobs-and-
securing-u-s-leadership-on-clean-energy-technologies/) (NDC) under the
Agreement.

### 4\. Advance Climate Resilience

_Has President Biden taken action to protect communities on the frontlines of
the climate crisis, help them recover from climate disasters, and build
climate resilience?_

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/e1a0809b-poff-8.png)

President Biden’s [Climate EO](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-
room/presidential-actions/2021/01/27/executive-order-on-tackling-the-climate-
crisis-at-home-and-abroad/) acknowledges the central importance of climate
resiliency in government policy, and includes building climate resilience as a
goal in his mandates on climate finance, the Civilian Climate Corps, agency
Climate Action Plans, and the creation of the National Climate Task Force.
Similarly, President Biden’s proposed [American Jobs
Plan](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-
releases/2021/03/31/fact-sheet-the-american-jobs-plan/) includes funding for
ARPA-C to advance R&D into climate resilience, and includes resilience as a
general goal in its housing, transportation, and other infrastructure spending
proposals.

### 5\. Strengthen Worker Protections and the Right to Organize

_Has President Biden taken steps to ensure a family-sustaining wage for all,
provide strong labor protections for workers in the clean energy future, and
strengthen the rights of workers to bargain?_

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/b914fd4c-poff-9.png)

President Biden has publicly [endorsed the PRO
Act](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-
releases/2021/03/09/statement-by-president-joe-biden-on-the-house-taking-up-
the-pro-act/), which passed the House of Representatives but has not yet been
voted on in the Senate. President Biden’s [Climate
EO](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-
actions/2021/01/27/executive-order-on-tackling-the-climate-crisis-at-home-and-
abroad/) calls for establishing federal procurement standards that “apply and
enforce the Davis-Bacon Act and prevailing wage and benefit requirements” and
Made in America Laws. The [American Jobs
Plan](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-
releases/2021/03/31/fact-sheet-the-american-jobs-plan/) calls for the creation
of “new, good-quality union jobs for American workers by leveraging their grit
and ingenuity to address the climate crisis and build a sustainable
infrastructure.”

### 6\. Achieve 100% Renewable Electricity by 2035

_Has President Biden enacted policies to achieve 100% renewable electricity by
2035 or sooner?_

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/5bdf0ef5-gnd-1.4.png)

President Biden’s [Climate EO](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-
room/presidential-actions/2021/01/27/executive-order-on-tackling-the-climate-
crisis-at-home-and-abroad/) calls for a “carbon pollution-free electricity
sector no later than 2035” — which notably could include carbon capture and
storage (CCS) and nuclear. His [American Jobs
Plan](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-
releases/2021/03/31/fact-sheet-the-american-jobs-plan/) proposes $100 billion
in investment to make it happen. The EO also calls for using federal funding
and procurement power to expand clean electricity. It is expected that
Interior will issue plans to increase renewable energy deployment on federal
lands, and that EPA will issue new regulations to reduce power sector
emissions.

### 7\. Eliminate Fossil Fuel Vehicle Sales by 2040

_Has President Biden enacted policies to decarbonize the transportation
sector, including phasing out internal combustion engine vehicle sales by 2040
or sooner?_

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/5bdf0ef5-gnd-1.4.png)

President Biden’s [Climate EO](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-
room/presidential-actions/2021/01/27/executive-order-on-tackling-the-climate-
crisis-at-home-and-abroad/) aims to use federal procurement to achieve or
facilitate “clean and zero-emission vehicles for Federal, State, local, and
Tribal government fleets, including vehicles of the United States Postal
Service.” His [American Jobs Plan](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-
room/statements-releases/2021/03/31/fact-sheet-the-american-jobs-plan/) (AJP)
proposes to create jobs through a $174 billion investment to grow the electric
vehicle market in the U.S., including by creating a “national network of
500,000 EV chargers by 2030” and electrifying at least 20 percent of the
school bus network. The AJP would also invest in rail and public transit. It
is expected that EPA will also introduce stronger emissions and fuel economy
standards for vehicles, but details have not been released. Unlike for the
power sector, however, President Biden has not yet committed to a
transportation sector-wide emissions target.

### 8\. Eliminate Buildings Sector Emissions

_Has President Biden enacted policies to decarbonize the buildings sector?_

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/5bdf0ef5-gnd-1.4.png)

President Biden’s [Climate EO](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-
room/presidential-actions/2021/01/27/executive-order-on-tackling-the-climate-
crisis-at-home-and-abroad/) calls for federal agencies to “use the power of
procurement to increase the energy and water efficiency of United States
Government installations, buildings, and facilities and ensure they are
climate-ready.” His [American Jobs Plan](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-
room/statements-releases/2021/03/31/fact-sheet-the-american-jobs-plan/)
proposes $213 billion to “build, preserve, and retrofit more than two million
homes and commercial buildings” and proposes investments in “cutting-edge,
energy-efficient and electrified, resilient, and innovative school buildings.”
Unlike for the power sector, President Biden has not yet committed to a
buildings sector-wide emissions target.

### 9\. Reduce Industrial Sector Emissions

_Has President Biden enacted policies to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from
the industrial sector?_

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/5bdf0ef5-gnd-1.4.png)

President Biden’s proposed [American Jobs
Plan](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-
releases/2021/03/31/fact-sheet-the-american-jobs-plan/) (AJP) includes some
initiatives to spur industrial decarbonization, although it also expands
flawed policies such as the 45Q tax credit. The AJP proposes “15 decarbonized
hydrogen demonstration projects in distressed communities” and “ten pioneer
facilities that demonstrate carbon capture retrofits for large steel, cement,
and chemical production facilities” (with a mention of guarding against
cumulative pollution in those communities). The AJP also incorporates the
SCALE Act; proposes $16 billion for orphan well remediation to reduce methane
leakage, and clean up abandoned mines; and calls for $35 billion for R&D
investment to “position America as the global leader in clean energy
technology and clean energy jobs.” Unlike for the power sector, President
Biden has not yet committed to an industrial sector-wide emissions target.

### 10\. Reduce Agricultural Sector Emissions

_Has President Biden enacted policies to reduce agricultural sector emissions
and promote ecological farming and food systems?_

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/5bdf0ef5-gnd-1.4.png)

President Biden’s [Climate EO](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-
room/presidential-actions/2021/01/27/executive-order-on-tackling-the-climate-
crisis-at-home-and-abroad/) calls for a number of initiatives to advance
conservation, agriculture, and reforestation, including a Civilian
Conservation Corps and a report on meeting the goal of “conserving at least 30
percent of our lands and waters by 2030.” The EO notes that “America’s
farmers, ranchers, and forest landowners have an important role to play in
combating the climate crisis and reducing greenhouse gas emissions, by
sequestering carbon in soils, grasses, trees, and other vegetation and
sourcing sustainable bioproducts and fuels.” However, we’re still waiting for
President Biden to say no to all “false solutions,” which include biogas,
carbon capture, carbon offsets, counter-productive carbon pricing systems such
as carbon banks, and biofuels including biomass. President Biden’s [American
Jobs Plan](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-
releases/2021/03/31/fact-sheet-the-american-jobs-plan/) also proposes funding
with the goal to “Maximize the resilience of land and water resources to
protect communities and the environment.” President Biden has a lot of good
words, but specifics matter. The Biden-Harris Administration needs to do
[more](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/reports/just-recovery-agenda/).

### 11\. Elevate Frontline Leadership in Policymaking

_Has President Biden elevated frontline communities’ leadership to the highest
levels of government?_

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/b914fd4c-poff-9.png)

President Biden’s [Climate EO](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-
room/presidential-actions/2021/01/27/executive-order-on-tackling-the-climate-
crisis-at-home-and-abroad/) establishes a “[White House Environmental Justice
Advisory Council](https://www.epa.gov/environmentaljustice/white-house-
environmental-justice-advisory-council)” to advise the federal government on a
range of issues related to climate, conservation, and environmental justice.

