# President Biden‚Äôs Year 1 Climate Progress Report

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/12/4902b67b-biden-grahpic.png)

President Biden promised to pursue ambitious climate goals and to challenge
the power of the fossil fuel industry. Can he accomplish what science and
justice demand?

## Overview

President Biden‚Äôs first year in office resulted in some victories for our
communities and the climate, but there is work that remains unfinished and
most initiatives lack the ambition to meet the demands of science and justice.
[Widely popular
policies](https://www.dataforprogress.org/blog/2021/12/23/build-back-better-
was-popular-all-year), like investments in clean energy and protections for
vulnerable ecosystems, could become a reality if Congress passes the [Build
Back Better Act](https://www.whitehouse.gov/build-back-better/) (BBB) without
allowing fossil fuel interests to weaken it any further. The Act remains the
biggest opportunity for President Biden and Congress to secure key climate
policies. Unfortunately, the Act is currently stalled in the Senate.

The combined Build Back Better Act ‚Äì if passed in its current state ‚Äì and
bipartisan infrastructure packages contain more than [$600 billion in proposed
climate investments](https://www.progressivecaucuscenter.org/s/Build-Back-
Better-Climate.pdf) as well as removal of some taxpayer-funded international
fossil fuel subsidies. These are necessary steps to set the U.S. on a path to
fulfill its climate commitments. However, neither bill does enough to address
the out of control fossil fuel industry that continues to pollute our
communities and drive us towards climate catastrophe. Key tools in phasing out
fossil fuels such as eliminating the $15 billion in taxpayer-funded domestic
subsidies that go to fossil fuel companies every year and establishing a Clean
Energy Standard are notably absent from both bills.

It is true that President Biden‚Äôs climate plan is more ambitious than any
other president. Enacting that plan is where he is falling short. **We are not
on track to meet the global climate goal of limiting warming to under 1.5
degrees C that science says will prevent the worst effects of climate
change**. President Biden has delivered on only a few promises to communities
that have suffered the most from fossil fuel pollution and exploitation.

The current gridlock in Congress has proven to be a major hurdle for President
Biden to enact his climate plan, but he needs to do better at using every
option available to him to close the gap between what current policies can
achieve and what our communities need. So far, President Biden has been
unwilling to use his executive powers to declare a climate emergency, which
would allow him to reinstate the crude oil export ban and halt federal fossil
fuel leasing on public lands.

## Methodology

Greenpeace USA graded President Biden on his administration‚Äôs progress toward
phasing out fossil fuels and enacting a Green New Deal. In 2020, Greenpeace
USA graded then-candidate Biden on his campaign promises. The campaign
promises and [official climate platform](https://joebiden.com/climate-plan/)
put forth by **candidate Biden earned a** **final score of 75.5 out of 100
points**. Now that he is in office, the climate movement must hold President
Biden to his campaign promises while inspiring him to go above and beyond
those promises to meet the needs of our communities and do what science
demands.

This progress report measures President Biden‚Äôs steps toward full
implementation, as described below, with weighted criteria used to evaluate
his campaign commitments. After his first [100 days in
office](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/research/president-bidens-100-day-
climate-progress-report/), we graded President Biden to track his progress (he
scored 30/100 then). We are now updating it after his first year in office and
**his score has increased to 36/100**. Take a look at [Biden‚Äôs score breakdown
over time
here](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1ogQ4SDy0LeBEWSztw5vC-f4TQH7qAIrqHNv9TbwEeqM/edit#gid=0).

The final score for this progress report update does NOT account for policies
included in the draft Build Back Better Act, which is stalled in Congress at
the time of publishing. Should that Act pass in its current form and be signed
into law, President Biden‚Äôs total score could increase to a total of 42.5 /
100. We also highlight some key climate policies that were cut from the Build
Back Better Act to emphasize the areas where President Biden will need to make
up the gap with big, bold regulatory action in his second year.

### Progress Toward Action Key

##### ‚ìß No action

##### üîò Words only

##### ‚óê Some policy progress

##### ‚ö´Ô∏è Campaign promise met

##### ‚òÖ Gold standard

  * **No action:** No public statements or proposals
  * **Words****only:** Public statements or proposals related to topic, but not yet fully enacted
  * **Some policy****progress** : policies enacted, but do not yet meet President Biden‚Äôs campaign promise
  * **Campaign promise met:**[Campaign Promise](https://joebiden.com/climate-plan/) has been enacted, even if not as strong as the ‚Äúgold standard‚Äù policy
  * **Gold Standard** : Campaign Promise or better enacted that meets ‚Äúgold standard‚Äù criteria

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/12/db1d9f6e-people-vs-oil-banner-houston-
hero-e1570560820301.jpg)

## **Scoring**

### **Phasing Out Fossil Fuels: 14/50**

**Say #NoToFossilFuels** by enacting policies to halt oil, gas, and coal
expansion, phase out existing fossil fuel infrastructure, and center fossil
fuel workers and climate-impacted communities in the transition to a renewable
energy economy.

‚ìß Lead a managed fossil fuel phase out: 0/10

**Has President Biden initiated a managed phase out of domestic fossil fuel
production, both federal and non-federal, before 2050?**

The U.S. [must phase out fossil fuel
production](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-phaseout/)
as quickly as possible to meet global climate targets. During the campaign,
Joe Biden offered some rhetoric in support of phasing out fossil fuel
production. Kamala Harris went even further, proposing an international
agreement to address fossil fuel production. However, the Biden-Harris
Administration has not yet implemented policies to phase out fossil fuel
production.

‚óê Protect workers and communities: 4/10

**Has President Biden enacted policies to support workers and communities that
are economically dependent on the fossil fuel industry during the transition
to a 100 percent renewable energy future, ensuring that nobody is left
behind?**

President Biden‚Äôs January 27th ‚Äú[Executive Order on Tackling the Climate
Crisis at Home and Abroad](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-
room/presidential-actions/2021/01/27/executive-order-on-tackling-the-climate-
crisis-at-home-and-abroad/)‚Äù (Climate EO) identifies the need for federal
leadership to ‚Äúfoster economic revitalization of and investment in‚Äù energy
communities. The Climate EO mentions the importance of creating jobs reducing
emissions from abandoned wells and mines, and creates an Interagency Working
Group on Coal and Power Plant Communities and Economic Revitalization. The
Working Group has presented an [initial
report](https://netl.doe.gov/IWGInitialReport), but [no policies have been
implemented](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-
releases/2021/09/27/readout-of-the-interagency-working-group-on-coal-and-
power-plan-communities-meeting-for-economic-growth-that-benefits-everybody/)
yet.

The passage of the bipartisan [Infrastructure Investment and Jobs
Act](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-
releases/2021/11/08/fact-sheet-the-bipartisan-infrastructure-deal-boosts-
clean-energy-jobs-strengthens-resilience-and-advances-environmental-justice/)
(IIJA, commonly referred to as the bipartisan infrastructure bill) allocated
nearly $5 billion to ‚Äúclean up Superfund and brownfield sites, reclaim
abandoned mine land, and cap orphaned oil and gas wells,‚Äù which the White
House claims would create ‚Äúgood-paying, union jobs.‚Äù The bill also allocates
$10 billion to clean up toxic ‚Äúforever chemicals‚Äù known as PFAS in many
communities with a history of fossil fuel extraction, and $11.3 billion to
remediate abandoned coal mine sites across the country.

If passed, the Build Back Better Act would allocate $15 billion (originally
$30 billion) to create a Civilian Climate Corps with 300,000 good-paying green
jobs over the next ten years. However, President Biden has still not fully met
his campaign promise to fulfill ‚Äúour obligation to all workers impacted by the
energy transition‚Äù including support for pensions, benefits, and job training.

‚ìß End fossil fuel leasing: 0/3

**Has President Biden ended new fossil fuel leasing on public lands and
waters?**

President Biden‚Äôs [Climate Executive
Order](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-
actions/2021/01/27/executive-order-on-tackling-the-climate-crisis-at-home-and-
abroad/) implemented a temporary pause on ‚Äúnew oil and natural gas leases on
public lands or in offshore waters pending completion of a comprehensive
review.‚Äù However, this temporary policy was paused by a court ruling, and
since then the Biden administration has resumed holding lease sales. It is
expected that the still-unreleased review by the Department of the Interior
(DOI) will outline new policies to address fossil fuel production on public
lands, but the scope of those policies is unknown. On Nov. 17, 2021, the Biden
administration offered more than 80 million acres in the Gulf of Mexico for
lease to oil and gas companies. This represented the biggest oil and gas lease
sale ever offered. The [Biden administration approved more oil and gas
drilling permits on public lands per month than the Trump admin
did](https://www.citizen.org/wp-content/uploads/bidenoil-final.pdf) during
Trump‚Äôs first 3 years in office, according to a new Public Citizen analysis.
The Bureau of Land Management has scheduled [several onshore
auctions](https://www.blm.gov/programs/energy-and-minerals/oil-and-
gas/leasing) for the first quarter of 2022.

While there is still much uncertainty around the Build Back Better Act, the
version that the House passed would protect the Arctic National Wildlife
Refuge from oil drilling, eliminate non-competitive leasing, raise the minimum
onshore oil and gas minimum bid, and permanently ban offshore oil and gas
leasing along the entire Atlantic and Pacific coasts as well as the Eastern
Gulf of Mexico.

_Full credit would be awarded for a permanent and comprehensive halt to coal,
oil, and gas leasing and production on federal lands and waters. Partial
credit for calling a halt to just some federal leasing. Zero credit for
actively boosting any federal leasing._

‚óê End fossil fuel subsidies: 1.5/3

**Has President Biden eliminated federal fossil fuel subsidies?**

The Biden-Harris administration has supported ending some fossil fuel
subsidies. President Biden‚Äôs [Climate Executive
Order](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-
actions/2021/01/27/executive-order-on-tackling-the-climate-crisis-at-home-and-
abroad/) instructs the government to ‚Äútake steps to ensure that, to the extent
consistent with applicable law, federal funding is not directly subsidizing
fossil fuels.‚Äù The administration‚Äôs Made in America Tax Plan requested
[Congress remove $121 billion in fossil fuel
subsidies](https://oversight.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight.house.gov/files/2021-08-30.Khanna%20CBM%20et%20al.%20to%20Pelosi-
House%20Hoyer-House%20re%20Fossil%20Fuel%20Subsidies.pdf) over 10 years,
including $86 billion in tax breaks for foreign oil and gas income. The tax
plan alone is not enough to address the full spectrum of subsidies the fossil
fuel industry enjoys.

The Biden administration declined to endorse the most comprehensive approach
to ending $150 billion in fossil fuel subsidies as outlined in the End
Polluter Welfare Act.

The current version of the Build Back Better Act does not include the removal
of domestic fossil fuel subsidies including the most egregious example: the
intangible drilling tax credit. The bill even [expands carbon capture and
](https://unitedfrontlinetable.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/12/No-False-
Solutions-in-BBBA-Letter-to-Senate-20211214-FINAL.pdf)other subsidies that
benefit dirty energy companies. However, the bill does remove some taxpayer-
funded international subsidies, and it remains to be seen whether subsidy
removal will be added to the Senate version of the bill.

In the [Climate Executive Order](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-
room/presidential-actions/2021/01/27/executive-order-on-tackling-the-climate-
crisis-at-home-and-abroad/), President Biden says he will direct a
comprehensive review of all federal agencies to identify any fossil fuels
subsidies and release a report. However, the Biden administration has not
completed the [interagency review of fossil fuel
subsidies](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-
actions/2021/01/27/executive-order-on-tackling-the-climate-crisis-at-home-and-
abroad/) that was promised.

On April 22, 2021, President Biden instructed agencies to ‚Äú[seek to end
international investments in and support for carbon-intensive fossil fuel-
based energy projects](https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-
content/uploads/2021/04/U.S.-International-Climate-Finance-
Plan-4.22.21-Updated-Spacing.pdf),‚Äù and at COP26, [joined a group of 20
nations pledging](https://ukcop26.org/statement-on-international-public-
support-for-the-clean-energy-transition/) to end ‚Äúnew direct public support
for the international unabated fossil fuel energy sector.‚Äù

 _Ending international subsidies and public finance for fossil fuels are
important steps, but removing domestic production subsidies are critical for
shifting high impact tax incentives away from fossil fuel companies. Full
credit would be awarded for brokering a deal with Congress to eliminate all
domestic and international fossil fuel subsidies._

‚ìß Ban fossil fuel exports: 0/3

**Has President Biden banned exports of crude oil, coal, and liquified natural
gas (LNG)?**

The Biden-Harris Administration has not taken any action so far to halt crude
oil, coal, or liquified natural gas exports, as [a coalition of climate,
environmental justice, and public health groups
](http://stopfossilfuelexports.org/)are demanding.

_Full credit would be awarded for a ban on exports of all types of fossil
fuels, and partial credit for a ban on only some types (e.g., crude oil)._

üîò Implement a climate test for fossil fuel infrastructure: 1/3

**Has President Biden denied all federal permits for fossil fuel projects that
would increase climate pollution?**

President Biden revoked the permit for the Keystone XL pipeline, but has not
yet taken further action to halt federal permits for other tar sands, oil, and
fracked gas pipelines as well as other fossil fuel infrastructure permits that
would exacerbate the climate crisis. President Biden‚Äôs [Climate Executive
Order](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-
actions/2021/01/27/executive-order-on-tackling-the-climate-crisis-at-home-and-
abroad/) aims to ‚Äúensure that Federal infrastructure investment reduces
climate pollution, and to require that Federal permitting decisions consider
the effects of greenhouse gas emissions and climate change‚Äù but remains
unclear what this will mean in practice. President Biden‚Äôs ‚Äú[Executive Order
on Protecting Public Health and the Environment and Restoring Science to
Tackle the Climate Crisis](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-
room/presidential-actions/2021/01/20/executive-order-protecting-public-health-
and-environment-and-restoring-science-to-tackle-climate-crisis/)‚Äù also
mandates that agencies ‚Äúcapture the full costs of greenhouse gas emissions as
accurately as possible‚Äù by updating and using the social cost of carbon (SCC),
which could be one step toward fully accounting for the climate costs of
polluting infrastructure.

 _Full credit would be awarded for implementing a ‚Äúclimate test‚Äù policy across
all agencies that not only measures the climate impact of federal permits but
rejects projects that worsen climate change. Partial credit for opposing some
fossil fuel infrastructure on climate grounds._

üîò Hold polluters accountable: 1/4

**Has President Biden held fossil fuel polluters accountable for the costs of
climate disaster?**

President Biden‚Äôs [Climate Executive
Order](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-
actions/2021/01/27/executive-order-on-tackling-the-climate-crisis-at-home-and-
abroad/) states, ‚ÄúWe must hold polluters accountable for their actions,‚Äù but
to date the Biden-Harris administration has not taken concrete action to do
so.

‚óê Respect Indigenous sovereignty: 2/5

**Has President Biden upheld Indigenous Peoples‚Äô rights to self-determination,
free, prior, and informed consent (e.g., for fossil fuel projects on
Indigenous territories), and other rights as laid out in the United Nations
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples?**

During his first week, President Biden
[released](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-
releases/2021/11/15/fact-sheet-building-a-new-era-of-nation-to-nation-
engagement/) a ‚Äú[Memorandum on Tribal Consultation and Strengthening Nation-
to-Nation Relationships](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-
room/presidential-actions/2021/01/26/memorandum-on-tribal-consultation-and-
strengthening-nation-to-nation-relationships/)‚Äù that mandates each agency
develop a plan for nation-to-nation consultation. This memo mostly returns
Federal practices with respect to Tribes to Obama-era precedents.

In December 2021, 17 federal agencies signed a [memorandum of
understanding](https://www.eenews.net/articles/biden-tribal-policy-would-
shake-up-energy-law-on-public-lands/) committing to increased consultation and
collaboration with Tribal Nations and pledging to incorporate traditional
knowledge into government assessments. President Biden described the memo as
making ‚Äúsubstantial changes in Indian Country‚Äù and experts described the memo
as potentially relevant to some litigation. Neither document institutes Free,
Prior, and Informed Consent. President Biden has not spoken publicly about
supporting the U.N. Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.

‚óê Advance environmental justice: 2.5/5

**Has President Biden combatted the racial, economic, and environmental
injustices that have led working families and people of color to bear the
brunt of fossil fuel and toxic pollution? Has he worked to foster healthy,
sustainable, and regenerative communities?**

President Biden‚Äôs Climate Executive Order mandates the creation of a White
House Environmental Justice Interagency Council, which is charged with
developing a ‚Äústrategy to address current and historic environmental
injustice.‚Äù The EO also tasks the Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) with
creating an equity mapping tool, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and
Department of Justice (DOJ) with tightening enforcement of violations with
disproportionate impact, and Health and Human Services (HHS) with developing a
focus on health equity. The EO also kicked off the administration‚Äôs ‚ÄúJustice40
Initiative,‚Äù which is tasked with a goal of ‚Äúdelivering 40 percent of the
overall benefits of relevant federal investments to disadvantaged
communities.‚Äù Environmental justice activists are urging the administration to
develop clear quantitative measurements to prove that 40 percent of the
benefits are actually going to frontline communities.

The version of the Build Back Better Act that is still being debated includes
over 50 environmental justice provisions, including $5 billion in block grants
for community-led projects, $2.6 billion to reduce air pollution at ports, $9
billion (along with $15 billion in the infrastructure bill) for lead
remediation, 40 percent set-aside investments from the Greenhouse Gas
Reduction Fund, and funds to develop THRIVE criteria for investment in
disadvantaged communities.

####

‚óê Appoint a fossil fuel free administration: 2/4

**Has President Biden nominated, appointed, and hired administration officials
who are free from the influence of fossil fuel corporations, executives, and
lobbyists?**

President Biden appointed a Cabinet free from overt fossil fuel influence and
implemented a White House [Ethics Pledge](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-
room/presidential-actions/2021/01/20/executive-order-ethics-commitments-by-
executive-branch-personnel/) with [strong revolving door
provisions](https://www.citizensforethics.org/reports-investigations/crew-
reports/biden-ethics-pledge-compared-obama-trump/). Despite these pledges,
there are [members of the administration with significant financial
investments and career ties](https://therevolvingdoorproject.org/financial-
disclosures-reveal-fossil-fuel-industrys-pipeline-to-the-white-house/) to
fossil fuel corporations.

President Biden‚Äôs January 27th ‚Äú[Executive Order on Tackling the Climate
Crisis at Home and Abroad](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-
room/presidential-actions/2021/01/27/executive-order-on-tackling-the-climate-
crisis-at-home-and-abroad/)‚Äù (Climate EO) identifies the need for federal
leadership to ‚Äúfoster economic revitalization of and investment in‚Äù energy
communities. The Climate EO mentions the importance of creating jobs reducing
emissions from abandoned wells and mines, and creates an Interagency Working
Group on Coal and Power Plant Communities and Economic Revitalization. The
Working Group has presented an [initial
report](https://netl.doe.gov/IWGInitialReport), but [no policies have been
implemented](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-
releases/2021/09/27/readout-of-the-interagency-working-group-on-coal-and-
power-plan-communities-meeting-for-economic-growth-that-benefits-everybody/)
yet.

### Advancing a Green New Deal: 22 / 50

**Champion a Green New Deal** by mobilizing our economy toward 100% renewable
energy for all, creating millions of family-sustaining jobs, and securing a
better future for communities that have borne the brunt of fossil fuel
industry exploitation.

üîò Support a Green New Deal: 1/5

**Has President Biden supported the Green New Deal (GND), as proposed by Sen.
Markey and Rep. Ocasio-Cortez, or the THRIVE Agenda, which calls for a GND-
style economic recovery?**

President Biden has not publicly supported nor enacted the [GND
Resolution](https://www.congress.gov/bill/116th-congress/house-
resolution/109/text) or [THRIVE Agenda](https://www.thriveagenda.com/).
However, the original Build Back Better Framework and the version of the bill
that has passed the House, do capture the spirit of the original GND. Should
the Build Back Better Act pass Congress it would be a step toward making this
vision a reality.

üîò Commit to near-zero greenhouse gas emissions before 2050: 1/5

**Has President Biden required net-zero U.S. greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions
earlier than 2050?**

We must reach net-zero GHG emissions globally by 2050 to have a chance at
[limiting warming to below 1.5¬∞C](https://www.ipcc.ch/sr15/). The U.S. has the
capacity ‚Äî and global responsibility ‚Äî to reach net-zero emissions sooner.
Partial credit for supporting net-zero by 2050. Zero credit for not committing
to net-zero, setting a timeline later than 2050, or for relying on the use of
carbon capture and sequestration (CCS), offsets, or other false energy
solutions.

President Biden‚Äôs [Climate Executive
Order](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-
actions/2021/01/27/executive-order-on-tackling-the-climate-crisis-at-home-and-
abroad/) notes the promise of solutions to ‚Äúput the United States on a path to
achieve net-zero emissions, economy-wide, by no later than 2050,‚Äù but stops
short of formally pledging this as a target. On April 22, 2021, President
Biden [announced](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-
releases/2021/04/22/fact-sheet-president-biden-sets-2030-greenhouse-gas-
pollution-reduction-target-aimed-at-creating-good-paying-union-jobs-and-
securing-u-s-leadership-on-clean-energy-technologies/) a new nationally
determined contribution (NDC) under the Paris Agreement that affirms the
administration‚Äôs goal of ‚Äúreaching net zero emissions economy-wide by no later
than 2050.‚Äù

Together, the infrastructure bill and the latest version of the Build Back
Better Act would [eliminate nearly a
gigaton](https://repeatproject.org/docs/REPEAT_Prelim_Report_Addendum_111221.pdf)
of greenhouse gas emissions by 2030. This would come close to Biden‚Äôs 2030
interim target of emissions 50-52 percent lower than 2005 levels, although
slower than the pace needed to reach net-zero emissions in 2050.

[View Future U.S. greenhouse gas emissions under existing policies and Build
Back Better](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/12/3d3013e3-future-u.s.-greenhouse-gas-emissions.png)

‚òÖ Rejoin the Paris Agreement: 5/5

**Has President Biden supported the U.S. remaining a party to the Paris
Agreement?**

On January 20, 2021 President Biden [took action to re-
enter](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-
releases/2021/01/20/paris-climate-agreement/) the Paris Climate Agreement, and
on April 22, 2021 announced a [stronger nationally determined
contribution](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-
releases/2021/04/22/fact-sheet-president-biden-sets-2030-greenhouse-gas-
pollution-reduction-target-aimed-at-creating-good-paying-union-jobs-and-
securing-u-s-leadership-on-clean-energy-technologies/) (NDC) under the
Agreement.

‚óê Advance climate resilience: 2/5

**Has President Biden taken action to protect communities on the frontlines of
the climate crisis, help them recover from climate disasters, and build
climate resilience?**

President Biden‚Äôs [Climate Executive
Order](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-
actions/2021/01/27/executive-order-on-tackling-the-climate-crisis-at-home-and-
abroad/) acknowledges the central importance of climate resiliency in
government policy. The EO includes building climate resilience as a goal in
his mandates on climate finance, the Civilian Climate Corps, agency Climate
Action Plans, and the creation of the National Climate Task Force.

The [infrastructure bill enacted by
Congress](https://www.progressivecaucuscenter.org/s/Build-Back-Better-
Climate.pdf) includes significant funding to increase the resiliency of
transportation infrastructure and water supplies. The bill contains
conservation funding for the Great Lakes, Chesapeake Bay, Puget Sound, the
Delaware River Basin, and the Klamath River Basin, and includes $350 million
for the construction of infrastructure to allow wildlife safe passage under or
over roads. The bill also includes funding for reducing risks from flooding
and other natural disasters.

If passed by Congress, the Build Back Better Act [would allocate
funds](https://www.progressivecaucuscenter.org/s/Build-Back-Better-
Climate.pdf) to a number of different climate resiliency initiatives
including: $15 billion for reducing the risk of wildfires; $13 billion for
protecting forests; $2.5 billion for urban forestry projects; $6 billion to
restore coastal ecosystems; $200 million for the Endangered Species Act; $250
million for wildlife refuges; and $100 million to create and revitalize local
parks in urban areas. Unfortunately, almost all of the forest and wildfire
resilience funding seems set to funnel money into the logging industry and
incentivize the destruction of old-growth forests. In order to responsibly
reduce the risk of wildfires, funding should instead be devoted to community
smoke shelters, defensible space, and municipal building code regulation. The
Biden administration must ensure the protection of our forests as part of a
holistic climate plan.

‚óê Strengthen worker protections and the right to organize: 2.5/5

**Has President Biden taken steps to ensure a family-sustaining wage for all,
provide strong labor protections for workers in the clean energy future, and
strengthen the rights of workers to bargain?**

President Biden has publicly [endorsed the PRO
Act](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-
releases/2021/03/09/statement-by-president-joe-biden-on-the-house-taking-up-
the-pro-act/), which passed the House of Representatives but has not yet been
voted on in the Senate. President Biden‚Äôs [Climate Executive
Order](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-
actions/2021/01/27/executive-order-on-tackling-the-climate-crisis-at-home-and-
abroad/) calls for establishing federal procurement standards that ‚Äúapply and
enforce the Davis-Bacon Act and prevailing wage and benefit requirements‚Äù and
Made in America Laws. The [American Jobs
Plan](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-
releases/2021/03/31/fact-sheet-the-american-jobs-plan/) calls for the creation
of ‚Äúnew, good-quality union jobs for American workers by leveraging their grit
and ingenuity to address the climate crisis and build a sustainable
infrastructure.‚Äù

A number of the investments from the latest version of the Build Back Better
Act do ‚Äú[encourage companies to work with
unions](https://www.progressivecaucuscenter.org/s/Build-Back-Better-
Climate.pdf)‚Äìthrough an incentive structure that will lead companies to pay
living wages, employ highly-trained workers, and use a majority of materials
produced domestically.‚Äù

 _Credit awarded for supporting a living wage, strong labor protections, and
bargaining rights for workers across the economy._

‚óê Achieve 100% renewable electricity by 2035: 2/4

**Has President Biden enacted policies to achieve 100 percent renewable
electricity by 2035 or sooner?**

President Biden‚Äôs [Climate Executive
Order](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-
actions/2021/01/27/executive-order-on-tackling-the-climate-crisis-at-home-and-
abroad/) calls for a ‚Äúcarbon pollution-free electricity sector no later than
2035‚Äù ‚Äî which notably could include fossil energy with carbon capture and
storage and nuclear. The EO also calls for using federal funding and
procurement power to expand clean electricity, and the Department of the
Interior has taken steps to hold [lease sales for offshore wind
production](https://www.eenews.net/articles/interior-takes-major-steps-on-
offshore-wind-in-atlantic-gulf/) in the Gulf and the
[Atlantic](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-
releases/2022/01/12/fact-sheet-biden-harris-administration-races-to-deploy-
clean-energy-that-creates-jobs-and-lowers-costs/). It is expected that the EPA
will issue new regulations to reduce power sector emissions, but the scope of
those regulations remains unknown.

The infrastructure bill enacted by Congress contains a number of provisions to
deploy clean [energy technologies in the electric power
sector](https://www.progressivecaucuscenter.org/s/Build-Back-Better-
Climate.pdf), including:

‚Äì $355 million for energy storage; $100 million for wind energy; $84 million
for geothermal; $80 million for solar energy; $5 billion to improve the
resiliency of the electric grid;
‚Äì $3 billion expansion of the Smart Grid Investment Matching Grant Program;
$2.5 billion for the construction of power transmission lines; and $1 billion
to support transmission projects in rural areas.

The Department of the Interior [recently
announced](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-
releases/2022/01/12/fact-sheet-biden-harris-administration-races-to-deploy-
clean-energy-that-creates-jobs-and-lowers-costs/?utm_source=twitter) a
significant offshore wind lease sale in the New York Bight which demonstrates
the impact policies like the infrastructure bill can have on implementing
climate action. This sale is expected to lead to the generation of up to 7
gigawatts of clean energy.

Should it pass Congress, the [current version of the Build Back Better
Act](https://www.progressivecaucuscenter.org/s/Build-Back-Better-Climate.pdf)
would create $320 billion in production and investment tax credits to
accelerate the manufacturing and installation of clean electricity including
wind, solar, energy storage, and advanced manufacturing. These tax credits
would drive the bulk of the Build Back Better Act‚Äôs emissions reductions. The
bill also includes tax credits and DOE grants and loans for transmission
projects such as $2.88 billion for loans for renewable energy and renewable
energy storage projects, and other provisions. The initial Build Back Better
Act included a strong clean electricity program that would have rewarded
utilities that stopped burning coal and gas and shifted to renewable energy,
however that provision was stripped out during negotiations with Sen. Joe
Manchin (D-WV).

Investments in clean energy are critical, but are not sufficient in limiting
climate change without simultaneously phasing out fossil fuels. We envision a
world free from nuclear energy, fossil fuels, and other false energy
solutions, and are defining ‚Äúrenewable‚Äù as such. Credit would be awarded for
ambitious plans with detailed commitments. Partial credit for some detail
and/or less ambition, including simply implementing a return to Obama-era
climate regulations.

####

[View U.S. electricity sector CO2
emissions](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/12/2298738a-us-electricity-sector-co2-emissions.png)

‚óê Eliminate fossil fuel vehicle sales by 2040: 2/4

**Has President Biden enacted policies to decarbonize the transportation
sector, including phasing out internal combustion engine vehicle sales by 2040
or sooner?**

President Biden‚Äôs [Climate Executive
Order](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-
actions/2021/01/27/executive-order-on-tackling-the-climate-crisis-at-home-and-
abroad/) aims to use federal procurement to achieve or facilitate ‚Äúclean and
zero-emission vehicles for Federal, State, local, and Tribal government
fleets, including vehicles of the United States Postal Service.‚Äù

In December 2021, the [Environmental Protection
Agency](https://www.epa.gov/regulations-emissions-vehicles-and-engines/final-
rule-revise-existing-national-ghg-emissions) finalized federal greenhouse gas
emissions standards for passenger cars and light trucks. This rule will reduce
climate emissions from new vehicles and reverses a major Trump rollback. Under
this rule, it is estimated that [about 20 percent of new
sales](https://www.washingtonpost.com/climate-environment/2021/12/20/auto-
mileage-rule-biden-climate/) will be electric or plug-in hybrids by 2026.
However, the new standard is not sufficient to put the U.S. on a path to 100
percent zero-emission vehicle sales by 2040. Unlike for the power sector,
President Biden has not yet committed to a transportation sector-wide
decarbonization target.

The [Infrastructure Investment and Jobs
Act](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-
releases/2021/11/08/fact-sheet-the-bipartisan-infrastructure-deal-boosts-
clean-energy-jobs-strengthens-resilience-and-advances-environmental-justice/)
(IIJA, commonly referred to as the bipartisan infrastructure bill) includes
some funding to support [decarbonization of the transportation
sector](https://www.progressivecaucuscenter.org/s/Build-Back-Better-
Climate.pdf), including $7.5 billion to build a national network of EV
charging stations and $6 billion to support the development of domestic
battery manufacturing and recycling. The bill also includes $5 billion for the
purchase of low- and zero-emission school buses.

Should it pass Congress, the Build Back Better Act
[includes](https://www.progressivecaucuscenter.org/s/Build-Back-Better-
Climate.pdf):
‚Äì various refundable tax credits to make purchasing an electric vehicle more
affordable;
‚Äì $3.4 billion for EV charging infrastructure; $3 billion for federal
procurement of zero-emission and electric vehicles; and $2.57 billion for the
purchase of U.S. Postal Service electric delivery vehicles;
‚Äì $5 billion for zero-emissions heavy-duty vehicles, including garbage trucks
and school buses.

‚óê Eliminate buildings sector emissions: 1.5/4

**Has President Biden enacted policies to decarbonize the buildings sector?**

President Biden‚Äôs [Climate Executive
Order](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-
actions/2021/01/27/executive-order-on-tackling-the-climate-crisis-at-home-and-
abroad/) calls for federal agencies to ‚Äúuse the power of procurement to
increase the energy and water efficiency of United States Government
installations, buildings, and facilities and ensure they are climate-ready.‚Äù
Unlike for the power sector, President Biden has not yet committed to a
buildings sector-wide emissions target.
The [bipartisan infrastructure bill
includes](https://www.progressivecaucuscenter.org/s/Build-Back-Better-
Climate.pdf) $3.5 billion for the Weatherization Assistance Program to help
low-income households increase energy efficiency and lower energy bills, among
other provisions.

Should it pass Congress, the Build Back Better Act[
includes](https://www.progressivecaucuscenter.org/s/Build-Back-Better-
Climate.pdf):
‚Äì Rebates to households to incentivize energy efficiency and electrification,
worth as much as $500/year in lower energy costs;
‚Äì Extends various residential and commercial energy efficiency tax credits;
‚Äì $500 million to convert federal buildings to high-performance green
buildings; and
‚Äì $700 million for states to adopt stronger building codes.

_Credit would be awarded for articulating a specific goal to decarbonize
residential and commercial buildings, and proposing detailed policies to do
so. The Biden administration must also use its regulatory authority to foster
greater electrification and energy efficiency in new and existing buildings,
and to spur adoption of alternatives to oil and natural gas. For example,
updating federal energy efficiency standards for home appliances represents
one possibility among many to drive decarbonization in this sector._

‚óê Reduce industrial sector emissions: 1.5/4

**Has President Biden enacted policies to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from
the industrial sector?**

The [bipartisan infrastructure
bill](https://www.govtrack.us/congress/bills/117/hr3684/text) includes funding
that could help to spur industrial decarbonization, like $4.7 billion in
funding for the remediation of orphan wells, however it also expands unproven
climate policies such as carbon capture, utilization, and storage (CCUS). The
bill includes $500 million for industrial decarbonization demonstration
projects, alongside $3.5 billion for CCUS demonstration projects and $2.5
billion for advanced nuclear power demonstrations. The bill provides billions
in funding for regional direct air capture (DAC) and ‚Äúclean‚Äù hydrogen hubs,
and funding for the transportation and geologic storage of captured carbon.
Providing funding for these false climate solutions is misguided and
demonstrates how the bipartisan infrastructure bill fails to challenge the
power of the fossil fuel industry. Unlike for the power sector, President
Biden has not yet committed to an industrial sector-wide emissions target.

The [Build Back Better Act‚Äôs](https://www.progressivecaucuscenter.org/s/Build-
Back-Better-Climate.pdf) clean energy tax credits could also play a role in
decarbonizing the industrial sector. If the Methane Emissions Reductions
Program is included in the final bill, fossil fuel companies will have to pay
a fee for excess methane emissions and will receive support for taking action
to plug leaks. However, the U.S. approach to [methane reductions fails to
address emissions from industrial meat and dairy at the
source](https://www.greenpeace.org.uk/news/greenpeace-response-to-the-global-
methane-pledge/). The [Biden administration‚Äôs plan proposes measures that
could increase concentrated industrial
agriculture](https://www.foodandwaterwatch.org/2022/01/13/one-states-faulty-
energy-plan-is-incentivizing-pollution-nationwide-biden-wants-to-make-it-the-
national-model/) by incentivizing health-wrecking Concentrated Animal Feed
Operations (CAFOs) for biogas production from manure ‚Äì another dirty source of
energy that will increase air and water contamination for frontline
communities of color. The Build Back Better Act also includes funding to
electrify diesel-burning equipment and reduce air pollution at the nation‚Äôs
ports.

_Credit would be awarded for articulating an ambitious Greenhouse Gas
Emissions reduction goal for the industrial sector, and proposing detailed
policies to achieve the goal. Commitments to eliminate methane emissions from
oil and gas production, and to implement ‚Äúbuy clean‚Äù rules for government
procurement are especially important._

üîò Reduce agricultural sector emissions: 1/4

**Has President Biden enacted policies to reduce agricultural sector emissions
and promote ecological farming and food systems?**

President Biden‚Äôs [Climate Executive
Order](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-
actions/2021/01/27/executive-order-on-tackling-the-climate-crisis-at-home-and-
abroad/) calls for a number of initiatives to advance conservation,
agriculture, and reforestation, including a Civilian Conservation Corps and a
report on meeting the goal of ‚Äúconserving at least 30 percent of our lands and
waters by 2030.‚Äù The EO notes that ‚ÄúAmerica‚Äôs farmers, ranchers, and forest
landowners have an important role to play in combating the climate crisis and
reducing greenhouse gas emissions, by sequestering carbon in soils, grasses,
trees, and other vegetation and sourcing sustainable bioproducts and fuels.‚Äù
However, we‚Äôre still waiting for President Biden to end support for false
solutions, which include carbon offsets, counter-productive carbon pricing
systems such as carbon banks, and biofuels including biomass and biogas.

President Biden‚Äôs [American Jobs Plan](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-
room/statements-releases/2021/03/31/fact-sheet-the-american-jobs-plan/) also
proposes funding with the goal to ‚Äúmaximize the resilience of land and water
resources to protect communities and the environment.‚Äù President Biden has a
lot of good words, but the details matter. The Biden-Harris administration
needs to do [more](https://prod.greenpeaceusa.info/usa/reports/just-recovery-
agenda/).

If passed, the [Build Back Better
Act](https://www.progressivecaucuscenter.org/s/Build-Back-Better-Climate.pdf)
would include investments in regenerative agriculture, including funding for
the Conservation Stewardship Program to increase crop resilience.
Unfortunately, the bill could increase pesticide and synthetic fertilizer use,
but that remains to be seen. There are [perverse incentives that could expand
pesticide intensive commodities](https://www.iatp.org/documents/methane-
agreement-good-first-step-agriculture-sidestepped) such as corn and soy that
are tied to industrial animal production. The bill claims to help farmers
switch to renewable energy and increase energy efficiency, but [the
administration‚Äôs approach would further incentivize Concentrated Animal
Feeding Operations (CAFOs) and scale up manure
digesters](https://1bps6437gg8c169i0y1drtgz-wpengine.netdna-ssl.com/wp-
content/uploads/2021/12/Letter-Reject-Support-for-CAFOs-in-BBB-.pdf). CAFOs
fuel the climate crisis and contaminate local air, water, and the broader
environment. CAFOs and factory farms are not climate solutions and have no
place in Build Back Better.

‚óê Elevate frontline leadership in policymaking: 2.5/5

**Has President Biden elevated frontline communities‚Äô leadership to the
highest levels of government?**

President Biden‚Äôs [Climate Executive
Order](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-
actions/2021/01/27/executive-order-on-tackling-the-climate-crisis-at-home-and-
abroad/) establishes a ‚Äú[White House Environmental Justice Advisory Council
](https://www.epa.gov/environmentaljustice/white-house-environmental-justice-
advisory-council)‚Äù to advise the federal government on a range of issues
related to climate, conservation, and environmental justice.

The Biden administration must follow through and actually incorporate the
recommendations from frontline leadership into policymaking, most notably the
recommendations in the May 2021 final report from the [White House
Environmental Justice Advisory
Council.](https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2021-05/documents/whiteh2.pdf)

There are over 50 environmental justice provisions included in the Build Back
Better Act, and the [Justice40](https://www.thejustice40.com/) principle is
included in over 50 programs. The Biden administration must include leaders
from frontline communities in both crafting policy and implementing it,
actions like forming new structures and processes within government agencies
that go beyond typical comment periods to actually change decision making to
reflect community wants and needs.

 _As articulated by_[ _Climate Justice
Alliance_](https://climatejusticealliance.org/green-new-deal-must-rooted-just-
transition-workers-communities-impacted-climate-change/) _: ‚ÄúWe call on the
GND to include frontline, climate affected communities at all stages, from the
earliest planning stages through the delivery of programs. This process should
be guided by the communities themselves, since they are in the best position
to assess local needs and priorities.‚Äù_

## Conclusion

Our score of 36 out of 100 for President Biden‚Äôs first year in office shows
that while the president and his administration are saying many of the right
things, they have taken very few tangible actions to protect our communities
from the worst effects of the climate crisis or confront an out of control
fossil fuel industry.

**The time for talk is over, President Biden needs to put the full force of
his power as president behind his climate promises.**

This starts with transitioning off of fossil fuels and onto renewable energy,
ending leasing of public lands to oil and gas companies, and standing up to
the fossil fuel companies who disproportionately harm Black, Brown,
Indigenous, and working communities.

