# Rex Tillerson’s Conflict of Interest in Guyana

#### Tillerson will write the rules for Exxon’s massive Oil find in Guyana.

One of the biggest and most immediate conflicts of interest Rex Tillerson
would face as Secretary of State involves the small country of Guyana, where
Exxon has booked huge oil finds in the last year. Tillerson will oversee a
State Department program that is writing environmental and other regulations
for the country, which currently has no regulatory framework.

![Action at Rex Tillerson Senate Confirmation Hearing in Washington D.C. © Ken
Cedeno / Greenpeace](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/10/39af3c1e-gp0stqfqu.jpg)Activists with Greenpeace peacefully
interrupted the Foreign Relation Committee’s confirmation hearing for former
ExxonMobil Chairman and CEO Rex Tillerson’s nomination for U.S. Secretary of
State. © Ken Cedeno / Greenpeace

Guyana, a Caribbean nation that borders Venezuela, has a population of under 1
million people and is the 3rd [poorest country in Latin
America](http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/guyana). Exxon’s oil find there
is currently estimated at over 4 billion barrels of oil – worth more than $200
billion. However, only 2 out of 20 offshore fields have been explored so far –
which may mean far more oil is actually available.

There has never been large scale oil and gas extraction in Guyana, and the
country has no real framework for regulating multinational oil companies like
Exxon. The oil industry calls such places “frontier” locations. As the
[Washington
Post](https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/worldviews/wp/2017/01/16/rex-
tillerson-got-burned-in-venezuela-then-he-got-revenge/?utm_term=.6f923b70cbdc)
writes:

“frontier” locations typically offer the most lucrative terms to foreign
companies willing to invest. Guyana’s foreign partners stand to earn 60 to 65
percent of profits, a far larger share than what more established nations are
willing to offer investors.

This makes Guyana a much larger and economically[ important
](http://www.cnbc.com/2016/12/13/exxon-mobil-could-tap-huge-arctic-assets-if-
us-russian-relations-thaw.html)find than Exxon’s holdings in Russia, at least
in the near term.

## State Department Oversight of Exxon in Guyana

The Guyanese government faces the prospect of regulating a company with an
annual profit margin that is over 5[ times
larger](http://news.exxonmobil.com/press-release/exxonmobil-
earns-162-billion-2015-28-billion-during-fourth-quarter) than [Guyana’s
GDP](http://data.worldbank.org/country/guyana). With no technical expertise in
offshore oil drilling and no experience handling super-powered corporations,
Guyana faces the real possibility of suffering the “resource curse,” in which
a place with massive resource wealth is pillaged and left for broke by bad
management and predatory colonial practices.

Interestingly, the State Department has recognized this dilemma. Under
Secretary Clinton, the State Department set up a program called the [Energy
Governance and Capacity
Initiative](https://webcache.googleusercontent.com/search?q=cache:dUq-s3Ae0qgJ:https://m.state.gov/mc38722.htm+&cd=1&hl=en&ct=clnk&gl=us).
A characteristically Clintonian program, it aims to both promote fossil
development and prevent the “resource curse” by providing “[independent
oversight](https://www.state.gov/documents/organization/264507.pdf)” of the
oil and gas industry in nascent oil states. The program is currently helping
the Guyanese government write profit sharing agreements, environmental
regulations, and develop a strong rule of law to counterbalance corporate
power.

There is righteous critique of this from people who say the main outcome of
such a program would be to help Exxon profit from Guyana’s resources under the
patina of rule of law. While that critique may have been valid while Hillary
Clinton was Secretary of State, it will be an inarguable fact if Rex Tillerson
assumes the Secretaryship.

It seems unlikely bordering impossible that Tillerson would, or even could
recuse himself from his conflicted role. In his nomination hearing, Tillerson
said he would recuse himself for one year from carrying out foreign policy
that deals directly with ExxonMobil. Considering Exxon has dealings in in
[nearly a third](http://corporate.exxonmobil.com/en/company/worldwide-
operations/locations) of the World’s countries, a strict adherence to this
promise would cripple the State Department.

Furthermore, Tillerson will have a significant impact on State Department
policy even if he does recuse himself from specific issues. As Secretary he
will appoint and hire the staff of the Bureau of Energy Resources, which runs
the EGCI. Under Clinton, David Goldwyn was the main negotiator for EGCI, and
[visited Guyana](https://wikileaks.org/plusd/cables/10GEORGETOWN90_a.html) as
part of the initiative. Goldwyn was Clinton’s right hand when it came to oil
and gas diplomacy, helping her [open
Mexico](https://www.desmogblog.com/2015/08/07/hillary-clinton-state-
department-emails-mexico-energy-reform-revolving-door)’s oil market and
[promote fracking worldwide](https://theintercept.com/2016/05/23/hillary-
clinton-fracking/). It stands to reason that Tillerson will fill that post
with someone equally adept at integrating oil industry and State Department
goals. They will at the very least represent their boss’s position while
negotiating in Guyana. This means someone who shares Tillerson’s worldview
will be responsible for prioritizing environmental and profit sharing
regulations affecting Exxon. The unavoidable outcome of this is friendlier
rules for Exxon, rules that prioritize production over over the environment,
and corporate comfort over social justice.

![Action at Rex Tillerson Senate Confirmation Hearing in Washington D.C. ©
Robert Meyers / Greenpeace](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/10/8fdeb6d0-gp0stqfpp.jpg)Greenpeace activists display banners
reading Reject Rexx outside the United States Capitol. © Robert Meyers /
Greenpeace

## Exxon in Guyana: a History of stirring conflict

There is a long backstory to Rex Tillerson and Exxon’s actions in Guyana. When
Exxon initially announced this find in 2015, they knowingly caused an
international incident, replete with troops amassing on borders and the
outright threat of violence. This potential violence was stirred because
Guyana’s neighbor, Venezuela claims ownership of the area on which Exxon found
the oil.

Rex Tillerson and Venezuela have been enemies since Venezuela nationalized
Exxon’s oil production there. Rex Tillerson took this as a personal affront.
The drilling in the disputed waters off Guyana, was therefore seen as Rex
Tillerson [“getting
even”](https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/worldviews/wp/2017/01/16/rex-
tillerson-got-burned-in-venezuela-then-he-got-revenge/?utm_term=.6f923b70cbdc)
with Venezuela.

