# Riot Platforms: The Company Behind the Most Energy Intensive Bitcoin Mine in the U.S.

Riot Platforms is leading the polluting Bitcoin boom in Texas. The company
operates the largest, and one of most energy and carbon-intensive, Bitcoin
mines in the U.S. at their Rockdale facility and now plans to build an even
bigger and dirtier mine in Corsicana.

![Bitcoin Mining in Texas](https://storage.googleapis.com/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/c3784e88-gp0stwjvn_low_res_with_credit_line.jpg)An aerial
view of the Riot Bitcoin mining facility in Rockdale, Texas.
Riot’s Rockdale Facility has a total power capacity of 750 MW, with 450 MW
currently developed. This facility is believed to be the largest single
facility, as measured by developed capacity, in North America for Bitcoin
mining. The Rockdale Facility is currently undergoing a substantial expansion
project that is nearly doubling the site’s Bitcoin mining capacity to 700 MW.
This expansion includes four new buildings, totaling approximately 240,000 sq
ft. and adding 400 MW of capacity. Once this expansion is complete, it is
expected that Riot’s Rockdale Facility will be the largest Bitcoin mining
facility in the world, as measured by developed capacity.

Bitcoin mining operations in Rockdale, Texas.
Bitdeer – a firm spun off from Chinese bitcoin mining giant Bitmain – is four-
tenths of a mile down the road from Riot Blockchain, one of the biggest
publicly traded mining companies in America. Both are tenants of property once
occupied by aluminum maker Alcoa.

**Summary**

  * Riot Platforms is leading the polluting Bitcoin boom in Texas. The company operates the largest, and one of most energy and carbon-intensive, Bitcoin mines in the U.S. at their Rockdale facility and now plans to build an even bigger and dirtier mine in Corsicana.
  * Riot’s massive fossil fuel-generated energy use contributes to the climate crisis, while the company also profits from extreme weather. During heatwaves and cold snaps, Riot makes millions of dollars by simply doing nothing and selling energy back to the grid – often more than they earn mining Bitcoin.
  * Texans are footing the bill with higher energy prices due to increased electricity demand from Riot, and tax incentives and subsidies going to Riot and other Bitcoin miners.
  * Big financial companies including BlackRock, JP Morgan Chase, and Vanguard are helping bankroll Riot’s carbon emissions and water consumption.

**Introduction**

As the saying goes, everything is bigger in Texas, including Bitcoin mines.
And that means big carbon emissions. Texas has become a hub for Bitcoin mining
and since 2021, 2,234 megawatts (MW) of Bitcoin mining facilities have been
built in the state by around 30 companies. [1] Standing out in this Bitcoin
boom is Riot Platforms’ sprawling facility near Rockdale, Texas that is
estimated to be the most energy and carbon-intensive Bitcoin mine in the U.S.
[2] Riot now plans to grow that facility and while building an even bigger
mine in the state, one that could be the largest in the world. This all means
even more carbon emissions and local air, water, and noise pollution. [3]

Through its large Texas operations, Riot, a publicly traded company based in
Castle Rock, Colorado, has grown into one of the largest Bitcoin mining
companies in the U.S. Riot’s facilities also rely primarily on fossil fuel
generated electricity leading to massive carbon emissions. [4] While the
company contributes to the climate crisis, it [makes money during extreme
weather events](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2023-09-06/bitcoin-
btc-miner-riot-riot-made-record-31-million-from-power-credits), like heat
waves and cold snaps, by getting paid to simply shut down and sell power back
to the grid. [5] Meanwhile, everyday Texans are suffering from sweltering
temperatures, paying higher energy bills, and dealing with the consequences of
a strained electricity grid.

**Environmental and Community Impacts**

Riot Platforms operates the most energy and carbon-intensive Bitcoin mines in
the United States out of an abandoned aluminum smelting plant in Rockdale,
Texas. The facility is [estimated to use 450 MW of
power](https://www.nytimes.com/2023/04/09/business/bitcoin-mining-electricity-
pollution.html), equivalent to the amount of electricity used by the nearest
300,000 homes. [6] And almost all of that electricity comes from dirty fossil
fuels, producing annual CO2 emissions of 1.9 million tons. Yet, according to
Riot,[ the facility has even greater power
capacity](https://www.riotplatforms.com/bitcoin-mining/whinstone-u-s), 750 MW,
and the company is in the process of expansion. [7] That would mean more GHG
emissions and more electricity drained from the grid rather than going into
people’s homes and offices.

Meanwhile, Riot is constructing[ a new facility in Corsicana,
Texas](https://www.riotplatforms.com/investors/sec-filings/annual-
reports/content/0001558370-23-002704/0001558370-23-002704.pdf), about 60 miles
south of Dallas in Navarro County, that would be even larger, potentially
using 1 gigawatt of energy. [8] That could make it the largest Bitcoin mine in
the world. The facility would generate even more carbon emissions and
[increase demand on the already-strained Texas electrical
grid](https://www.washingtonpost.com/climate-solutions/2022/07/15/bitcoin-
crypto-texas-heat-wave/). [9] The added energy demand could push fossil fuel
plants to keep operating and expand production.

Riot’s approach to criticism is to either deny creating carbon emissions or
greenwash its operations by claiming to support renewable energy. In response
to an extensive [_New York
Times_](https://www.nytimes.com/2023/04/09/business/bitcoin-mining-
electricity-pollution.html)[
investigation](https://www.nytimes.com/2023/04/09/business/bitcoin-mining-
electricity-pollution.html) revealing the company’s huge energy use and GHG
emissions, [Riot released a video claiming the company’s mines have no
emissions](https://twitter.com/RiotPlatforms/status/1645473961004892162) – a
ridiculous argument that ignores how carbon emissions are calculated. [10] The
company also[ issued a scathing statement in
response](https://www.globenewswire.com/news-
release/2023/04/10/2643988/0/en/Riot-Platforms-Inc-Statement-The-New-York-
Times-Politically-Driven-Attack-On-Bitcoin-Mining-Is-Full-of-Distortions-
Outright-Falsehoods.html) that denied the company’s climate impacts. [11]

Yet, Riot’s environmental record is concerning. The company does not disclose
GHG emissions or other environmental data which would provide vital
transparency and accountability. It has a dismal ESG Score of 1.06 out of 10
from Bloomberg, and a 0 on environmental factors since the company does not
disclose any environmental data, aside from discussing potential risks of
climate change to its business. [12] In January 2022, a group of U.S. Senators
and Congresspeople, including Elizabeth Warren and Edward Markey, [wrote a
letter to Riot and five other Bitcoin mining
companies](https://www.warren.senate.gov/newsroom/press-releases/warren-
colleagues-press-six-cryptomining-companies-on-extraordinarily-high-energy-
use-and-climate-impacts), over concerns about high energy use and requested
more reporting and data including about the companies’ energy consumption and
emissions. [13]

Beyond the climate and air pollution implications of Bitcoin mining, these
operations also create noise pollution that is harmful and disruptive to
surrounding communities. Bitcoin [mines are very
loud](https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/09/09-2022-Crypto-
Assets-and-Climate-Report.pdf) largely due to the fans needed to cool the
equipment. Facility noise can reach and remain at 95 dB, which some nearby
residents have [compared to having a jet-engine in your
backyard](https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/interactive/2022/cryptocurrency-
mine-noise-homes-nc/). [14] All that noise has[ led to complaints and protests
from affected communities ](https://www.corsicanadailysun.com/news/update-
bitcoin-facility-breaks-ground-draws-protesters/article_4bcc8bac-4f0d-11ed-
adac-770ace851452.html)in Texas and around the United States who are upset
about the constant din from these industrial facilities that operate around-
the-clock. [15] Riot’s [Rockdale mine](https://www.globenewswire.com/en/news-
release/2021/10/19/2316621/0/en/Riot-Announces-First-Industrial-Scale-
Immersion-Cooled-Bitcoin-Mining-Operation.html) uses a mix of the loud air
cooling method and some immersion cooling – submerging computers in liquid to
keep them cool and clean, which reduces the need for fans. [16] The company
has a water reservation agreement to pay approximately $2.1 million annually
to get water from a nearby lake for use in cooling. [17] Riot says that the
[Corsicana mine will use immersion
cooling](https://www.riotplatforms.com/investors/news-events/press-
releases/detail/127/riot-blockchain-announces-1-gw-development-in-navarro).
[18] However, it remains to be seen whether Riot actually uses this
technology, which is more expensive.

The new Corsicana mine could use [large amounts of
water](https://www.dallasnews.com/business/local-companies/2022/06/16/we-do-
not-want-this-corsicana-group-protests-riot-blockchains-bitcoin-mining-
facility/) which is a major concern in an area enduring a historic drought.
[19] The City of Corsicana plans to sell water to Riot which is projected to
be up to [1.5 million gallons of water per
day](https://earthjustice.org/feature/cryptocurrency-mining-texas#36). [20]
Meanwhile ranchers have recently been[ forced to sell cattle due to the lack
of water](https://texasfarmbureau.org/drought-forces-record-number-of-cattle-
sold-in-texas/) in the region. [21]

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-stateless/2024/11/71f0fcee-
gp0stwjv1_web_size_with_credit_line.jpg)

An aerial view of Bitdeer’s Rockdale, Texas facility. Bitdeer – a firm spun
off from Chinese bitcoin mining giant Bitmain – is four-tenths of a mile down
the road from Riot Blockchain, one of the biggest publicly traded mining
companies in America. Both are tenants of property once occupied by aluminum
maker Alcoa.

**Running on Public Money**

Riot’s polluting facilities benefit from a range of public subsidies and tax
incentives, despite the [anti-government rhetoric from the Bitcoin
industry](https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2022/09/crypto-
technology-government-regulation/671375/). [22] In particular, Riot receives
payments from the Texas grid operator, ERCOT, to reduce and shut-down
operations during periods of high demand and high energy prices. Thus, large
energy users like Riot [contribute to the climate crisis and strained energy
grids while benefiting from extreme weather and an overloaded
grid](https://www.washingtonpost.com/climate-solutions/2022/07/15/bitcoin-
crypto-texas-heat-wave/). [23] Riot has been paid millions by reducing usage
and selling back electricity during periods of peak demand, like the [record-
setting deadly heat
waves](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2023-09-06/bitcoin-btc-miner-
riot-riot-made-record-31-million-from-power-credits) in summer 2023 when the
company made $31.7 million in August alone. [24] Meanwhile, everyday Texans
were asked to turn down their air conditioning and suffer through hot
temperatures with no compensation.

The demand response program (in Texas called Responsive Reserve Service) that
Riot participates in pays companies, with funds from ratepayers, for agreeing
to cut back energy use. Yet residential customers cannot[ participate in the
program](https://www.canarymedia.com/articles/grid-edge/why-arent-texans-paid-
to-help-prevent-blackouts-during-heat-waves) and are asked to voluntarily cut
back their use during energy crises. [25] Through the demand response program,
Riot gets [paid by promising to stop using electricity if ERCOT
asks](https://www.nytimes.com/2023/04/09/business/bitcoin-mining-electricity-
pollution.html), even though ERCOT rarely requests them to do so. [26] Plus,
miners might have shut-down at those times anyway given the high price of
energy. Thus, miners like Riot can make millions of dollars for essentially
doing nothing.

Another way Riot makes money is by selling electricity back to the grid which,
in 2022, [earned the company $18
million](https://www.nytimes.com/2023/04/09/business/bitcoin-mining-
electricity-pollution.html). [27] Miners like Riot secure long-term energy
contracts with low prices and then can [sell energy back at the higher market
prices](https://www.techtransparencyproject.org/articles/cryptocurrency-
miners-sweetheart-deal-texas-threatens-already-fragile-grid) during periods of
peak demand. [28] Price fluctuations are particularly extreme in Texas given
the state’s independent and deregulated energy market. In 2022, the _New York
Times_ found that [Riot saved around $27 million in potential
fees](https://www.nytimes.com/2023/04/09/business/bitcoin-mining-electricity-
pollution.html) by cutting back usage during periods of high demand. [29] At
times Riot can make more money by shutting down and selling energy back to the
grid than[ mining Bitcoin](https://fortune.com/2022/08/13/riot-blockchain-
bitcoin-mining-texas-electric-grid-subsidy). [30] In August 2023, Riot made
nearly four times as much money by selling energy than the company made mining
Bitcoin.

When winter storm Uri hit Texas in 2021, millions went without electricity for
days during subzero temperatures and [at least 246 people
died](https://www.texastribune.org/2022/01/02/texas-winter-storm-final-death-
toll-246/), some freezing inside their homes. [31] And Texans who did have
power faced [astronomical electricity
bills](https://www.forbes.com/sites/robertbryce/2022/08/24/texas-consumers-on-
hook-for-10-billion-in-debt-incurred-during-winter-storm-uri/?sh=394e8aa1f091)
due to huge electricity price spikes. [32] Yet, miners like Riot were getting
paid to scale back their operations and sell energy to the grid at high
prices. [Riot made $125 million selling energy during the
storm](https://www.citizen.org/wp-content/uploads/2022-11-17-PCTX-Crypto-
Mining-Impacts-in-Texas.pdf). [33]

While heat waves and winter storms have exposed vulnerabilities in the Texas
energy grid, more and more energy demand from Bitcoin mining is being
proposed, like Riot’s Corsicana facility. ERCOT is reviewing applications from
Bitcoin miners to [bring nearly 42 GW of electricity demand online by
2027](https://www.ercot.com/files/docs/2023/05/31/LLI%20Queue%20Status%20Update%20-%202023-05-31.pdf),
even a fraction of that would be a tremendous growth from the already
substantial 3,000 megawatts used by the industry. [34]

Texans are also paying more to keep their lights on than Riot pays to guess
numbers in the race to win Bitcoin. Riot told investors in an August 2023
report that the company paid 2.8 cents per KwH compared to the[ average price
of 7.2 cents for other industrial users and 13.5 cents for residents.
[35]](https://www.nytimes.com/2023/04/09/business/bitcoin-mining-electricity-
pollution.html) And miners like Riot are even making those electricity bills
higher for residents. Analysis by energy research and consulting firm Wood
Mackenzie finds that Bitcoin mining in Texas [will lead to a 5% increase in
electricity costs](https://qz.com/bitcoin-mining-has-raised-texas-electricity-
prices-5-1850319961) and cost an additional $1.8 billion per year. [36]

Riot benefits from other tax incentives and subsidies as well. The company’s
Whinstone mine in Rockdale is [exempted from many state sales
taxes](https://comptroller.texas.gov/taxes/data-centers/data-center-lists.php)
through a Texas program for data centers that exempts companies from state
sales and use tax on equipment and electricity. [37] The company that
originally built the facility, Whinstone, also received [public incentives and
tax abatements](https://www.rockdalemdd.org/news/whinstone-us-breaks-ground-
build-world%E2%80%99s-largest-bitcoin-mining-facility-rockdale-texas). [38]
Riot receives an abatement on improvements to the facility for an estimated
taxable value of $151 million. [39] However the promise of 300 jobs at Riot’s
Rockdale mine were overblown as [only 14 new hires have been
confirmed](https://earthjustice.org/document/the-energy-bomb-how-proof-of-
work-cryptocurrency-mining-worsens-the-climate-crisis-and-harms-communities-
now). [40]

Meanwhile, Riot’s executives are making large sums of money. In 2022, CEO
Jason Les and Chairman Benjamin Yi both made over $21 million in compensation
while four other top executives all made between $2 and $3 million. [41] That
was a year in which the company reported nearly $510 million in losses. [42]

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/5a0a37b0-gp0stwjus_web_size_with_credit_line.jpg)

Riot’s Rockdale Facility has a total power capacity of 750 MW, with 450 MW
currently developed. This facility is believed to be the largest single
facility, as measured by developed capacity, in North America for Bitcoin
mining. The Rockdale Facility is currently undergoing a substantial expansion
project that is nearly doubling the site’s Bitcoin mining capacity to 700 MW.
This expansion includes four new buildings, totaling approximately 240,000 sq
ft. and adding 400 MW of capacity. Once this expansion is complete, it is
expected that Riot’s Rockdale Facility will be the largest Bitcoin mining
facility in the world, as measured by developed capacity.

**Hopping on the Bitcoin Bandwagon**

Riot Platforms was not always in the mining Bitcoin business and used to
[develop veterinarian products and tools for diagnosing
diseases](https://www.cnbc.com/2018/02/16/public-company-changes-name-to-riot-
blockchain-sees-shares-rocket.html). [43] In October 2017, amidst a wave of
hype about blockchain and Bitcoin, the company made an abrupt shift after 17
years in biotech into the crypto industry. The company[ announced a name
change from Bioptix to Riot
Blockchain](https://www.cnbc.com/2018/02/16/public-company-changes-name-to-
riot-blockchain-sees-shares-rocket.html) and told investors the company was
getting into Bitcoin mining and other cryptocurrency services. [44] The
[company’s stock price soared](https://www.wsj.com/articles/this-biotech-
turned-blockchain-company-led-the-nasdaq-to-7000-1514928812) and attracted
lots of new buyers. But the sudden change was met with some criticism for
following the hype about Bitcoin. Some[ large shareholders sold off large
numbers of shares](https://www.wsj.com/articles/investor-who-rode-pivot-from-
biotech-to-bitcoin-sells-big-stake-1517403600), making a lot of money, and
several [annual meetings were abruptly
canceled](https://www.cnbc.com/2018/02/16/public-company-changes-name-to-riot-
blockchain-sees-shares-rocket.html). [45] This all led to several shareholder
lawsuits and an SEC investigation. Ultimately, the [lawsuits were
dismissed](https://news.bloomberglaw.com/litigation/riot-blockchain-pump-and-
dump-claims-dismissed-with-prejudice) and the [SEC investigation ended without
any recommendation of charges](https://www.riotplatforms.com/news-media/press-
releases/detail/70/riot-blockchain-announces-termination-of-sec-
investigation). [46] Still, the company continues to have weak governance
practices. Bloomberg’s ESG scores give Riot a 4.68 out of 10 on governance
issues which includes issues like executive compensation, board oversight, and
the strength of auditing practices. [47]

Since rebranding as a crypto company, Riot has acquired companies to grow its
Bitcoin mining operations. In May 2021, under the leadership of the new CEO
Jason Les, a former professional poker player, Riot made one of its largest
acquisitions – a $651 million deal to [buy Whinstone US, the company that
built the Rockdale mining facility](https://www.globenewswire.com/en/news-
release/2021/05/26/2236906/0/en/Riot-Blockchain-Completes-Acquisition-of-
Whinstone-US-Creating-Leading-North-American-Bitcoin-Mining-Company.html).
[48] Riot has also sought vertical integration by expanding into industries
that supply equipment services for Bitcoin mines. Also in 2021, Riot
[purchased ESS Metron](https://www.coindesk.com/business/2021/12/01/bitcoin-
miner-riot-buys-electrical-equipment-provider-ess-metron-for-50m/), an
electrical component engineering and manufacturing firm that caters to Bitcoin
miners, for $50 million. [49] This gives Riot ownership over a company that
provides essential infrastructure for its growing mining facilities. Riot also
has a [majority ownership stake in
TessPay](https://www.riotplatforms.com/news-media/press-
releases/detail/11/riot-blockchain-to-acquire-majority-interest-in-tess-a), a
fintech company that offers a blockchain payment platform for telecom
companies. [50]

In January 2023, the [company changed its name again from Riot Blockchain to
Riot Platforms to signal diversification](https://decrypt.co/118352/bitcoin-
mining-firm-riot-ditches-blockchain-from-name-in-rebrand) from Bitcoin and
cryptocurrency to other business streams, like high performance and cloud
computing, amidst a period of economic turmoil for Bitcoin miners. [51]
Riot’s[ share price had dropped 85% in 2022
](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2023-01-03/bitcoin-miner-riot-drops-
blockchain-from-name-after-rough-year)as the price of Bitcoin slumped and the
industry’s reputation struggled after numerous high-profile scandals. [52]

**Political Ties and Lobbying**

Riot, along with Bitcoin industry groups, has used its political muscle to
secure and protect policies and subsidies favorable to miners’ bottom line.
Riot has engaged in federal and state lobbying, and hired staff, often with
ties to government agencies and conservative groups, to promote the companies’
interests.

Publicly available data shows that Riot began spending on state and federal
lobbying in 2022. In 2022, Riot (then named Riot Blockchain) reported spending
$280,000 on federal lobbying through a contract with Holland and Knight, a
Florida-based law firm that has a large federal lobbying operation. [53] As of
August 2023, Riot has spent $220,000 on federal lobbying, which included
paying $160,000 for lobbying services to Holland and Knight while the rest was
done in-house by Riot staff. [54] Agencies that the company lobbied include
the Commodity Futures Trading Commissions (CFTC) that oversees Bitcoin futures
trading, the Department of Energy, Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and
Securities Exchange Commission (SEC). As of September 2023, Riot has spent
between $70,000-$151,000 on hiring lobbyists in Texas for the 2024 election
cycle. [55]

There is also a revolving door between former government officials and Riot’s
staff and board, especially people with ties to right-wing politicians. In
2023 Riot hired a head of public policy, Brian Morgenstern, who is a former
Trump Whitehouse official. Morgenstern served as [deputy communications
director and deputy press secretary for
Trump](https://www.politico.com/news/2020/07/20/brian-morgenstern-deputy-
press-secretary-375102) starting in July 2020, and before that was a deputy
assistant secretary for external affairs at the Department of the Treasury
where he served as a senior aide and chief speechwriter to Trump-appointed
Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin. [56] Morgenstern was named in an[
investigation by the U.S. Office of Special
Counsel](https://osc.gov/Documents/Hatch%20Act/Reports/Investigation%20of%20Political%20Activities%20by%20Senior%20Trump%20Administration%20Officials%20During%20the%202020%20Presidential%20Election.pdf)
as one of the officials who violated the Hatch Act by promoting Trump’s
reelection campaign during official interviews and media appearances. [57]
After working for Trump, Morgenstern was a Senior Advisor at the[ America
First Policy Institute ](https://www.axios.com/2021/04/13/trump-policy-
institute-brooke-rollins)– a group founded by ex-Trump administration
officials to continue promoting Trump’s conservative policy agenda. [58]
Morgenstern has a long career in Republican politics including working on
[Rudy Giuliani’s presidential
campaign](https://www.politico.com/news/2020/07/20/brian-morgenstern-deputy-
press-secretary-375102) in 2008. [59] The company also hired Samuel Lyman as
Director of Public Policy who also has ties to conservative politicians and
powerful corporate interests who worked at the Orrin G. Hatch Foundation after
being a speechwriter for Republican Senator Hatch, and was a speechwriter for
the U.S. Chamber of Commerce – the wealthy corporate lobby group that has
opposed action on climate change and environmental regulations. [60]

In May 2023, Riot announced that [Brad Jones, the former Interim President and
CEO of the Energy Reliability Council of Texas (“ERCOT”), was appointed to its
advisory board](https://www.riotplatforms.com/news-media/press-
releases/detail/153/riot-to-constitute-advisory-board-will-feature-former).
[61] Riot makes millions of dollars through various ERCOT programs and lobbies
for those policies to continue in order to protect a key source of revenue.

When Riot’s valuable ERCOT incentives were threatened by proposed state
legislation, the company and allied industry groups pushed hard to block the
bill. In spring 2023, Republican Texas state senator Lois Kolkhorst introduced
[Senate Bill 1751 that would cut back some incentives used by
Riot](https://www.houstonchronicle.com/business/energy/article/texas-
cryptocurrency-mining-electricity-incentives-17896124.php) and other miners.
[62] The bill would cap miner’s enrollment in ERCOT’s emergency response
services programs to 10% of all participants, require miners to register with
ERCOT as “large flexible load,” and prohibit property tax breaks to Bitcoin
mining facilities. The bill was passed by the Senate with bipartisan support,
but didn’t make it out of a House committee in part due to [mobilization by
Riot ](https://blockworks.co/news/riot-dislikes-texas-mining-bill)and [Bitcoin
industry groups ](https://cointelegraph.com/news/don-t-mess-with-texas-
innovation-advocates-criticize-bill-removing-crypto-mining-incentives)
including the Texas Blockchain Council (TBC), the Satoshi Action Fund, and the
Chamber of Digital Commerce. [63] [Riot worked to stop the
bill](https://blockworks.co/news/riot-dislikes-texas-mining-bill) by issuing
statements criticizing the legislation, telling legislators to vote against
it, and [having company leaders testify against the
bill](https://twitter.com/BitcoinMagazine/status/1641082935158747137?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw%7Ctwcamp%5Etweetembed%7Ctwterm%5E1643247964486352899%7Ctwgr%5E016822695718eded3cfd12c734b1fd4b7202f169%7Ctwcon%5Es3_&ref_url=https%3A%2F%2Fblockworks.co%2Fnews%2Ftexas-
blockchain-council-mining-bill). [64] TBC was also a vocal opponent and has
deep ties to Riot, which is an executive partner, the highest level of support
for the group. Riot’s head of public policy is also a board member of the TBC.
TBC has ties to powerful Texas Republicans like Governor Gregg Abbott. For
example, the TBC’s VP for Public Policy and External Affairs, Reed Clay, was
the[ Chief Operating Officer for the State of Texas under Governor Greg
Abbott](https://texasblockchaincouncil.org/team) and helped advance Abbot’s
far-right wing political agenda. [65] The industry[ celebrated killing the
bill](https://decrypt.co/143214/death-of-anti-mining-bill-means-texas-miners-
can-keep-raking-energy-credits) which they framed as an attack on the
industry. [66]

Meanwhile Riot has worked with Bitcoin mining and crypto industry groups to
push favorable legislation. For example, the U.S. Congressman Pete Sessions, a
Republican from Texas representing the district that covers Riot’s Rockdale
mine, proposed [House Resolution
238](https://www.congress.gov/118/bills/hres238/BILLS-118hres238ih.pdf?utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email)
that asserts proof-of-work mining is a boost for national energy goals and
economic growth. [67] Sessions has [appeared at events sponsored by the
industry](https://austinjournal.com/stories/640380147-texas-congressman-
announces-proof-of-work-mining-resolution-at-blockchain-
summit?utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email) alongside representatives of Riot
and praised the company. [68]

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/bc35ec53-gp0stx2yn_web_size.jpg)

Using stunning projections on prominent buildings in the heart of New York
City, Greenpeace USA cast a spotlight on the detrimental climate impact of
Bitcoin investments by financial giants JPMorgan Chase & Co. (Chase) and
BlackRock. The display painted the skyline with images of Blackrock CEO Larry
Fink and Chase CEO Jamie Dimon donning red laser eyes, similar to the profiles
of Bitcoin maximalists. Bitcoin consumes as much electricity as entire
countries, and 62% of the electricity used for Bitcoin mining globally in 2022
came from fossil fuels. Bitcoin’s energy-hungry technology has revived
decommissioned coal-fired and fossil fuel power plants and caused substantial
environmental and social damage.

**Big Financial Backers**

Riot’s pivot to Bitcoin mining and continued expansion relies on investments
from big financial companies and support from the traditional finance sector.
Riot has funded its expansion in part by selling more shares in the company to
large institutional investors. Currently, the two largest shareholders of Riot
are asset managers Vanguard and BlackRock who control 9.68% (valued at $196
million) and 6.5% (valued at $131.58 million) of outstanding shares
respectively. Other large banks and investment companies also control shares
of Riot, including State Street with 2.68% of shares, Morgan Stanley with 1%
of shares, JPMorgan Chase with 0.66% of shares, and Goldman Sachs with 0.35%.
[69] These six big financial companies collectively hold nearly 21% of Riot’s
shares which are valued at $421.54 million. Thus, Wall Street serves as a
major source of capital for Riot and its polluting Bitcoin mines.

Issuing new shares, or equity, relies on support from investment banks to
facilitate the sale and take on the risk of buying the new stock and then
selling it to investors. In May 2019, Riot issued additional shares in a deal
managed by investment bank HC Wainright which raised $18.9 million that Riot
said would be used for working expenses and capital. [70] In 2022, Riot again
issued additional shares raising $267 million in a deal managed by B Riley
along with BTIG LLC, Cantor Fitzgerald, DA Davidson & Co, Macquarie Capital
USA, Northland Securities, and Roth Capital Partners. [71] Riot said this
[equity offering would be used for general corporate
purposes](https://www.coindesk.com/business/2022/04/01/riot-blockchain-files-
to-sell-up-to-500m-of-stock-in-atm-offering/) which could include investments
in current and future projects and strategic acquisitions. [72]

On August 9, 2023, Riot announced another share offering that is expected to
raise $750 million. B Riley is the manager along with several other co-
managers including BTIG LLC, Cantor Fitzgerald, Compass Point Research, Moelis
& Co, Northland Securities, Roth Capital Partners, and Stifel Nicolaus & Co.
[73] The deal is still in process and is presumably being used to help fund
construction of the Corsicana site.

Bitcoin miners like all companies also need banking services to manage money
flows, make payroll, and make payments. [Riot reported having operating
accounts with Signature
Bank](https://advance.lexis.com/api/permalink/02318100-1052-4ec9-8e2a-597f37f22355/?context=1519360),
which catered to the crypto industry, before it failed and was shut down by
regulators in March 2023. [74] Riot has subsequently transferred deposits to
other banks which have not been reported publicly.

**Community Resistance**

Riot’s large polluting and noisy facilities have sparked the ire of nearby
residents and led to community resistance to the company’s expansion. As
people become aware of the noise, strain on the energy grid, and large water
usage from Bitcoin miners, opposition to Riot’s and other companies’
facilities around Texas has grown. Construction of the new Corsicana facility
has met resistance from nearby residents. The [Concerned Citizens of Navarro
County, led by Jackie Sawicky, mobilized to oppose the
project](https://www.dallasnews.com/business/local-companies/2022/06/16/we-do-
not-want-this-corsicana-group-protests-riot-blockchains-bitcoin-mining-
facility/), voicing concerns about noise, water usage, increasing electricity
bills, and public subsidies. [75] Concerned Citizens led a [protest at the
groundbreaking ceremony](https://www.nbcdfw.com/news/local/construction-of-
nava) for the 265-acre site and continues to push for more public input and
scrutiny into the opaque permitting and approval processes for the facility.
[76] Residents are worried that Riot’s mine would [use large amounts of
water](https://www.nbcnews.com/tech/crypto/can-fragile-texas-power-grid-
handle-cryptomining-gold-rush-rcna15726) and [drive up electricity prices
](https://www.nbcdfw.com/news/local/controversy-surrounds-worlds-largest-
bitcoin-mining-operation-to-be-built-near-corsicana/3011474/)which is a major
concern for people who already pay a lot to cool their homes during the long,
hot summers. [77] This is in an area where many people struggle to make ends
meet. In 2020, Navarro County has a [15.5% poverty
rate](https://datausa.io/profile/geo/navarro-county-
tx#:~:text=17%25%20of%20the%20population%20for,44%20and%20then%20Males%20%3C%205.)
and a median household income of $47,574 which is below the national average.
[78]

In summer 2023, Concerned Citizens joined with other advocates in Texas to
form the Texas Coalition Against Cryptomining to coordinate communities across
the state in addressing the environmental, economic, and social impacts of the
rapidly growing Bitcoin mining industry. Texas activists are also [connecting
with a national network ](https://www.eenews.net/articles/crypto-foes-gird-to-
stop-mines-from-spreading-like-cancer/)of groups working to stop expansion of
Bitcoin mining in their backyards, often with little public input but large
drains on public infrastructure. [79]

**Endnotes**

  1. https://earthjustice.org/wpcontent/uploads/energy_bomb_bitcoin_white_paper_101322.pdf; https://www.texastribune.org/2022/10/03/texas-cryptocurrency-mining-bitcoin/
  2. https://www.nytimes.com/2023/04/09/business/bitcoin-mining-electricity-pollution.html
  3. https://www.cbsnews.com/texas/news/massive-bitcoin-mining-operation-comes-to-north-texas/
  4. https://www.nytimes.com/2023/04/09/business/bitcoin-mining-electricity-pollution.html
  5. https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2023-09-06/bitcoin-btc-miner-riot-riot-made-record-31-million-from-power-credits
  6. https://www.nytimes.com/2023/04/09/business/bitcoin-mining-electricity-pollution.html
  7. https://www.riotplatforms.com/bitcoin-mining/whinstone-u-s
  8. https://www.riotplatforms.com/investors/sec-filings/annual-reports/content/0001558370-23-002704/0001558370-23-002704.pdf
  9. https://www.washingtonpost.com/climate-solutions/2022/07/15/bitcoin-crypto-texas-heat-wave/
  10. https://twitter.com/RiotPlatforms/status/1645473961004892162
  11. https://www.globenewswire.com/news-release/2023/04/10/2643988/0/en/Riot-Platforms-Inc-Statement-The-New-York-Times-Politically-Driven-Attack-On-Bitcoin-Mining-Is-Full-of-Distortions-Outright-Falsehoods.html
  12. Based on ESG data from Bloomberg Terminal.
  13. https://www.warren.senate.gov/newsroom/press-releases/warren-colleagues-press-six-cryptomining-companies-on-extraordinarily-high-energy-use-and-climate-impacts
  14. https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/09/09-2022-Crypto-Assets-and-Climate-Report.pdf; https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/interactive/2022/cryptocurrency-mine-noise-homes-nc/
  15. https://www.corsicanadailysun.com/news/update-bitcoin-facility-breaks-ground-draws-protesters/article_4bcc8bac-4f0d-11ed-adac-770ace851452.html
  16. https://www.globenewswire.com/en/news-release/2021/10/19/2316621/0/en/Riot-Announces-First-Industrial-Scale-Immersion-Cooled-Bitcoin-Mining-Operation.html
  17. Riot Platforms. SEC 10-Q Form. For the quarterly period ended June 30, 2023. https://www.riotplatforms.com/investors/sec-filings/all-sec-filings/content/0001558370-23-014336/0001558370-23-014336.pdf
  18. https://www.riotplatforms.com/investors/news-events/press-releases/detail/127/riot-blockchain-announces-1-gw-development-in-navarro
  19. https://www.dallasnews.com/business/local-companies/2022/06/16/we-do-not-want-this-corsicana-group-protests-riot-blockchains-bitcoin-mining-facility/
  20. https://earthjustice.org/feature/cryptocurrency-mining-texas#36
  21. https://texasfarmbureau.org/drought-forces-record-number-of-cattle-sold-in-texas/
  22. https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2022/09/crypto-technology-government-regulation/671375/
  23. https://www.washingtonpost.com/climate-solutions/2022/07/15/bitcoin-crypto-texas-heat-wave/
  24. https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2023-09-06/bitcoin-btc-miner-riot-riot-made-record-31-million-from-power-credits
  25. https://www.canarymedia.com/articles/grid-edge/why-arent-texans-paid-to-help-prevent-blackouts-during-heat-waves
  26. https://www.canarymedia.com/articles/grid-edge/why-arent-texans-paid-to-help-prevent-blackouts-during-heat-waves; https://www.nytimes.com/2023/04/09/business/bitcoin-mining-electricity-pollution.html
  27. https://www.nytimes.com/2023/04/09/business/bitcoin-mining-electricity-pollution.html
  28. https://www.techtransparencyproject.org/articles/cryptocurrency-miners-sweetheart-deal-texas-threatens-already-fragile-grid
  29. https://www.nytimes.com/2023/04/09/business/bitcoin-mining-electricity-pollution.html
  30. https://fortune.com/2022/08/13/riot-blockchain-bitcoin-mining-texas-electric-grid-subsidy
  31. https://www.texastribune.org/2022/01/02/texas-winter-storm-final-death-toll-246/
  32. https://www.forbes.com/sites/robertbryce/2022/08/24/texas-consumers-on-hook-for-10-billion-in-debt-incurred-during-winter-storm-uri/?sh=394e8aa1f091
  33. https://www.citizen.org/wp-content/uploads/2022-11-17-PCTX-Crypto-Mining-Impacts-in-Texas.pdf
  34. https://earthjustice.org/feature/cryptocurrency-mining-texas#:~:text=Cryptocurrency%20mining%20companies%20in%20Texas,during%20periods%20of%20peak%20demand; https://comptroller.texas.gov/economy/fiscal-notes/2022/aug/crypto-tx.php
  35. https://www.nytimes.com/2023/04/09/business/bitcoin-mining-electricity-pollution.html
  36. https://qz.com/bitcoin-mining-has-raised-texas-electricity-prices-5-1850319961
  37. https://comptroller.texas.gov/taxes/data-centers/data-center-lists.php
  38. https://www.rockdalemdd.org/news/whinstone-us-breaks-ground-build-world%E2%80%99s-largest-bitcoin-mining-facility-rockdale-texas
  39. https://earthjustice.org/feature/cryptocurrency-mining-texas#8-fn
  40. https://earthjustice.org/document/the-energy-bomb-how-proof-of-work-cryptocurrency-mining-worsens-the-climate-crisis-and-harms-communities-now
  41. Data from Bloomberg Terminal
  42. Riot Platforms Form 10-K for Fiscal Year Ending December 31, 2022. https://www.sec.gov/ix?doc=/Archives/edgar/data/1167419/000155837023002704/riot-20221231x10k.htm
  43. https://www.cnbc.com/2018/02/16/public-company-changes-name-to-riot-blockchain-sees-shares-rocket.html
  44. https://www.cnbc.com/2018/02/16/public-company-changes-name-to-riot-blockchain-sees-shares-rocket.html
  45. https://www.wsj.com/articles/investor-who-rode-pivot-from-biotech-to-bitcoin-sells-big-stake-1517403600; https://www.cnbc.com/2018/02/16/public-company-changes-name-to-riot-blockchain-sees-shares-rocket.html
  46. https://news.bloomberglaw.com/litigation/riot-blockchain-pump-and-dump-claims-dismissed-with-prejudice; https://www.riotplatforms.com/news-media/press-releases/detail/70/riot-blockchain-announces-termination-of-sec-investigation
  47. Based on ESG data from Bloomberg Terminal.
  48. https://www.globenewswire.com/en/news-release/2021/05/26/2236906/0/en/Riot-Blockchain-Completes-Acquisition-of-Whinstone-US-Creating-Leading-North-American-Bitcoin-Mining-Company.html
  49. https://www.coindesk.com/business/2021/12/01/bitcoin-miner-riot-buys-electrical-equipment-provider-ess-metron-for-50m/
  50. https://www.riotplatforms.com/news-media/press-releases/detail/11/riot-blockchain-to-acquire-majority-interest-in-tess-a
  51. https://decrypt.co/118352/bitcoin-mining-firm-riot-ditches-blockchain-from-name-in-rebrand
  52. https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2023-01-03/bitcoin-miner-riot-drops-blockchain-from-name-after-rough-year
  53. https://www.opensecrets.org/federal-lobbying/clients/hired-firms?cycle=2022&id=D000101665
  54. https://www.opensecrets.org/federal-lobbying/clients/summary?cycle=2023&id=F326956
  55. Texas reports lobbying expenditures amounts by ranges, not exact figures.Data retrieved from https://www.transparencyusa.org/tx/lobbying/client/riot-platforms-inc.
  56. https://www.politico.com/news/2020/07/20/brian-morgenstern-deputy-press-secretary-375102
  57. https://osc.gov/Documents/Hatch%20Act/Reports/Investigation%20of%20Political%20Activities%20by%20Senior%20Trump%20Administration%20Officials%20During%20the%202020%20Presidential%20Election.pdf
  58. https://www.axios.com/2021/04/13/trump-policy-institute-brooke-rollins
  59. https://www.politico.com/news/2020/07/20/brian-morgenstern-deputy-press-secretary-375102
  60. https://www.politico.com/newsletters/politico-influence/2023/09/13/blumenthal-subpoenas-saudi-wealth-fund-u-s-subsidiary-00115787; https://www.desmog.com/us-chamber-commerce/
  61. https://www.riotplatforms.com/news-media/press-releases/detail/153/riot-to-constitute-advisory-board-will-feature-former
  62. https://www.houstonchronicle.com/business/energy/article/texas-cryptocurrency-mining-electricity-incentives-17896124.php
  63. https://blockworks.co/news/riot-dislikes-texas-mining-bill; https://cointelegraph.com/news/don-t-mess-with-texas-innovation-advocates-criticize-bill-removing-crypto-mining-incentives
  64. https://blockworks.co/news/riot-dislikes-texas-mining-bill; https://twitter.com/BitcoinMagazine/status/1641082935158747137?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw%7Ctwcamp%5Etweetembed%7Ctwterm%5E1643247964486352899%7Ctwgr%5E016822695718eded3cfd12c734b1fd4b7202f169%7Ctwcon%5Es3_&ref_url=https%3A%2F%2Fblockworks.co%2Fnews%2Ftexas-blockchain-council-mining-bill
  65. https://texasblockchaincouncil.org/team
  66. https://decrypt.co/143214/death-of-anti-mining-bill-means-texas-miners-can-keep-raking-energy-credits
  67. https://www.congress.gov/118/bills/hres238/BILLS-118hres238ih.pdf?utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email
  68. https://austinjournal.com/stories/640380147-texas-congressman-announces-proof-of-work-mining-resolution-at-blockchain-summit?utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email
  69. Data from Bloomberg Terminal and based on shareholdings and prices as of 9/7/2023
  70. Data from Bloomberg Terminal. Original documents available at: Riot Blockchain. “At The Market Offering Agreement.” https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1167419/000107997319000327/riot_ex101.htm; Riot Blockchain. SEC Form 10-Q. September 30, 2020. https://www.riotplatforms.com/investors/sec-filings/all-sec-filings/content/0001079973-20-000948/riot10qq3-0920.htm.
  71. Based on data from Bloomberg Terminal.
  72. https://www.coindesk.com/business/2022/04/01/riot-blockchain-files-to-sell-up-to-500m-of-stock-in-atm-offering/
  73. Based on data from Bloomberg Terminal.
  74. Riot Platforms. SEC Form 8-K. March 14, 2023. https://www.riotplatforms.com/investors/sec-filings/all-sec-filings/content/0001167419-23-000009/riot-20230313x8k.htm
  75. https://www.dallasnews.com/business/local-companies/2022/06/16/we-do-not-want-this-corsicana-group-protests-riot-blockchains-bitcoin-mining-facility/
  76. https://www.nbcdfw.com/news/local/construction-of-nava
  77. https://www.nbcnews.com/tech/crypto/can-fragile-texas-power-grid-handle-cryptomining-gold-rush-rcna15726; https://www.nbcdfw.com/news/local/controversy-surrounds-worlds-largest-bitcoin-mining-operation-to-be-built-near-corsicana/3011474/
  78. https://datausa.io/profile/geo/navarro-county-tx#:~:text=17%25%20of%20the%20population%20for,44%20and%20then%20Males%20%3C%205.
  79. https://www.eenews.net/articles/crypto-foes-gird-to-stop-mines-from-spreading-like-cancer/

