3Roadmap to Recovery:A global network of marine reservesCallum M.Roberts,Leanne Mason and Julie P.HawkinsContributing authors:Elizabeth Masden,Gwilym Rowlands,Jenny Storey and Anna SwiftEnvironment Department,University of York,York,YO10 5DD,UKCorrespondence to:cr10@york.ac.uk©Greenpeace/Åslund451.Summary72.Introduction93.Aims of this report114.Life on the high seas114.1  The pelagic realm114.2  The deep sea135.History of exploitation of the high seas166.Present status and threats to life on the high seas176.1  Fishing176.2  Global warming186.3  Disposal of CO2186.4  Oil and mineral exploitation186.5  Bioprospecting206.6  Noise207.Designing a global marine reserve network for the high seas207.1  Marine reserves and why they are needed207.2  Will marine reserves protect species on the high seas?217.3  Identifying candidate sites for protection237.4  The grid258.Principles of marine reserve networking258.1  Site selection258.2  Networking and connectivity268.3  Level of replication268.4  Spacing of marine reserves268.5  Size of marine reserves268.6  Coverage of marine reserves279.Procedure used for computer-assisted design of a network 28of marine reserves9.1  Features and targets used for Marxananalyses29Oceanographic Features29Physical features29Biological data29Expert consultation3110.Design of a network of high seas marine reserves3111.Features of selected areas identified for protection3312.Implementing the network3913.Literature cited4114.Acknowledgements43Appendix 1:Data layers used43Appendix 2:Respondents to the expert consultation on 51high seas marine reserves.Appendix 3:Results of the expert consultation54contentRoadmap to Recovery:A global network of marine reserves6©Greenpeace/Grace©Greenpeace/Davison© Greenpeace/DavisonThe high seas lie beyond the 200 nauticalmile limits that define the extent of national sovereignty by countries of theworld. They cover 64% of the area of theoceans, and nearly half the surface of theplanet. They are a global commons, underthe stewardship of the United Nations Lawof the Sea for the benefit of all nations. But human pressures on the high seas areincreasing fast, and urgent action is neededto protect them from harm. Recentresearch shows that industrial fishing hasreduced populations of large, predatoryfish, like tunas and billfish, by ninety percent or more in the last fifty years.Some particularly vulnerable species, likesharks, have been reduced by factors of ahundred, or even a thousand. In the processof capturing these fish, industrial fishingmethods are killing untold numbers of otherwildlife, endangering birds, turtles andmarine mammals. In the deep sea, heavybottom trawling gears are destroyingseamount habitats that have taken thousands of years to develop and may beirreplaceable on human timescales. Muchof this activity is illegal, unregulated orgoes unreported.In this report we present a design for aglobal network of high seas marinereserves. Marine reserves are highly protected areas that are off limits to allextractive and destructive uses, includingfishing. They are the most powerful toolavailable for the conservation of oceanwildlife and may also benefit fisheries bypromoting recovery and reproduction ofexploited species. The network we proposeaims to protect places that are biologicallyrich, supporting outstanding concentrationsof animals and plants. It also seeks to protect places that are particularly threatened or vulnerable to present or possible future human impacts, like fishingor seabed mining. Our overarching aim isfor a network that is representative of thefull variety of life in the sea.To achieve these aims, we brought togethermany different kinds of biological, physicaland oceanographic data. Data on oceanographic features like water temperature gradients and upwelling areas,together with fishery and tracking data onoceanic megafauna, enabled us to identifyplaces that are hotspots of activity on thehigh seas for large-bodied and vulnerablespecies. They included tunas and billfish,albatrosses, turtles, pinnipeds (seals andsea lions) and penguins, animal groupswhose ranges cover the seas from pole topole. To this we added maps of cetaceandiversity. To ensure that our network is representative, we used data on the distribution of different biogeographicareas, depth zones, seabed sediment typesand ocean trenches to represent the varietyof habitats and their variation across theglobe. We paid particular attention to highly sensitive deepwater habitats, usingmaps of seamount distribution and bathymetry to identify places vulnerable toharm by bottom fishing. We also usedbathymetric data to calculate seabed complexity, which helps in identifying biologically rich places in the deep sea. All data were mapped using a geographicinformation system and gridded into 5olatitude by 5olongitude cells, the size ofthe smallest marine reserves that we considered to be viable in the high seas.1.Summary7©Greenpeace/Grace©Greenpeace/CulleyAn effective reserve network must be large enough to sustain species and ecological processes in perpetuity. Researchindicates that protecting between twentyand fifty percent of the sea will maximisebenefits to fisheries. It will also enable thecreation of networks of reserves that represent the full spectrum of life and replicate it in different reserves. Larger figures in this range are warranted forenvironments that support highly mobilespecies and where habitats are particularlysensitive to damage. To be viable over thelong term, populations protected byreserves must be large enough to be self-sustaining or must interconnect withothers in the network. These factors arguefor a high level of protection on the highseas, and we set a target of protecting fortypercent of the area of all habitats and biogeographic zones. We also set a series ofsubsidiary targets for inclusion of placesidentified as important for different speciesgroups. We used the computer programMarxanto help develop network designsthat met these targets with the minimumcoverage of marine reserves. The designpresented in this report includes twenty-nine separate marine reserves thattogether encompass 40.8% of the area ofthe world’s oceans. This network met allthe targets set and is representative of biodiversity on the high seas. All themarine reserves identified incorporateplaces that are biologically important basedon available data. However, their boundaries may be refined as more databecome available.It is our view that this network of marinereserves is essential to safeguard life on thehigh seas for the sake of our own andfuture generations. Implementing the network represent a challenge to the willand cooperative spirit of the world’snations. But time is short as the scale andseverity of harm are growing day by day. Inorder to reverse the precipitous decline ofthe life in our oceans and fulfill the targetsset by the Convention on BiologicalDiversity (CBD), we call on the UnitedNations to take urgent action to establishand protect a global network of marinereserves on the high seas.8©Greenpeace/Newman2.IntroductionOur Earth is an ocean planet.The sea covers nearly three quarters of its surface.Longago,before tribes wrestled control of patches of land from one another,and before tribesgave way to nations,people were free to roam the world,taking what they needed wherethey found it.The land was a commons for use by all.Today,the land has long since beenprivatised and fenced,and few places remain where such freedom applies.But on theoceans – beyond the 200 nautical mile limits of national waters – the seas are still a global commons.The high seas,as these regions are known,cover 64% of the area ofthe oceans,and nearly half of the planet’s surface.On the high seas,our freedom toexploit still takes precedence over our duty to protect.The high seas are the least regulated and least protected places in the world. Lying beyondthe limits of national jurisdiction, they are governed by the United Nations Law of theSea. This convention only came into force in 1994, and has yet to be signed by some ofthe most influential nations in the world. The Law of the Sea enshrines the right of accessand use of the high seas for all. It allows for nations to fish, lay submarine cables andpipelines, or create other installations such as rigs and even artificial islands, for example.While signatory nations are obliged to conserve and manage the resources they exploit,including fish, in reality few exercise much control over their high seas fleets. Many do notmonitor fishing operations, leaving their fleets to exploit high seas resources unhindered,to the detriment of all.High seas fisheries have grown rapidly in the last thirty years as a result of decliningnearshore stocks and the escalating value of prime fish like tuna on world markets. Thosefisheries have had dramatic impacts on populations of large, ocean-going fish like swordfish, tuna, marlin and sharks. Populations of these open water predators have plummeted, falling on average to one tenth of their abundance in the 1950s (Myers andWorm 2003). Some species, like the large oceanic whitetip shark (Carcharhinus longimanus)could be a hundred to a thousand times less common than they were fiftyyears ago (Baum and Myers 2004). Fisheries have also moved into the deep sea. Trawls and gillnets now penetrate to depthsof 2000m, while longlines can fish to 3000m. In the cold stillness and dark of the deep,these fisheries are targeting species that live slowly and reach great ages. Because theirpopulation growth rates are so slow, deep-sea fish are extremely vulnerable to overfishing,far more so than their shallow water counterparts that support traditional fisheries nearour coasts. High seas fishing fleets are more accurately characterised as mining vesselssince they are removing fish at rates far beyond those at which populations can replacethemselves. In the process of removing these animals they are doing untold damage toseabed habitats, tearing up corals, sponges and seafans and levelling myriad other species.An increased awareness of theseproblems has resulted in somepositive developments. In 1992the United Nations global moratorium on high seas driftnets came into force, soending the horrendous collateraldamage inflicted every year onthousands of marine mammals,seabirds and turtles by these so-called ‘walls of death’. 9© Greenpeace/Behring-Chisholm10©Greenpeace©Greenpeace/Aslund©Greenpeace/KantorMore recently the value of marine reserves as a key tool in preventing the loss of marinebiodiversity has been widely recognised.  The UN Millennium Project calls for 10% of theoceans to be covered by marine reserves in the short to medium term, with a long-termgoal of 30%. Furthermore in 2004, echoing pledges taken at the World Summit onSustainable Development (WSSD), the Convention on Biological Diversity’s 7thConference of the Parties (CoP 7) committed to the establishment of a global network ofmarine protected areas by 2012 (Decision VII/28).These are admirable targets but given the current rate of designation there is little to suggest that they will be achieved. A recent study indicated that the World Parks Congresstarget of creating a global system of marine protected area networks by 2012 – including‘strictly protected areas’ amounting to at least 20-30% of each habitat will not bereached until at least 2085. The 2085 date is even more alarming given that it is basedon an assumption that all marine protected areas from now on will be strictly protectedi.e. no-take marine reserves and that all existing marine protected areas will be convertedto strictly protected marine reserves. Similarly the Convention on Biological Diversity2012 target will not be met until 2069 (MPA News 2005).The current rate of progress is simply not going to deliver what the world’s governmentshave already agreed is needed to protect our oceans and the marine life that they harbour.  3.Aims of this reportThe collapse of life in the high seas has led to calls for urgent action to reverse thedecline, including the establishment of a global network of high seas marine protectedareas (World Parks Congress Resolution 23, Gjerde 2003, Balmford et al. 2004). In thisreport we present plans for such a network. Our objective is to identify candidate sites fora representative network of marine reserves that would afford protection to the full spectrum of life on the high seas. Marine reserves are places that are protected from allfishing and other extractive use (Roberts and Hawkins 2000). They are the most effectivemeans available for the conservation of marine life, but have yet to be used on the highseas. In fact, as yet there are few marine protected areas of any kind on the high seas, andnone that are effective. Urgent action is needed if we are to reverse loss of biodiversityacross the world’s oceans.4.Life on the high seas4.1  The pelagic realmObserved from a boat, the high seas can seem like an endless waste of barren water,empty but for the occasional bird or flying fish. Far from land the ocean is clear blue ofstartling intensity. The clarity is because there is so little matter, either living or inert, suspended in the water. Without nutrients plankton doesn’t grow, and without planktonnothing else can survive. But amid the rolling plains of blue emptiness, there exist oaseswhere nutrients brought to the surface enrich the sea. These fuel plankton that feed glittering shoals of tiny baitfish and armadas of squid. Upon them large and swift predators are able to sate their hunger. In the Pacific Ocean, west of the Galapagos, in years when there is no El Niño, a currentflows west along the equator. Passing by the islands, it kicks up spinning eddies andentrains nutrient-rich water brought up from the deep. Flowing west, planetary rotationtwists water to the right, north of the equator, and left, south of the equator. Known as theCoriolis force, this parting of the surface draws up water and nutrients from below.Satellite images of the Pacific reveal a streak of plankton growth along this line ofupwelling. In the early 19thcentury, these waters supported vast groups of sperm whales11(Physeter macrocephalus), sometimes five hundred strong, and attracted whalemen insearch of fortune from the other side of the world. Today the upwelling still attracts animals: tuna, albatross, terns, billfish and pods of dolphins all travel vast distances toexploit this rich feeding ground.Convergence zones where warm and cold currents press together and mix also trigger dramatic plankton blooms. East of South Africa, the Agulhas Current spills down the westof the continent from the tropics, mixing as it does with the cool, dense water of theSouthern Ocean in a region known as the Subtropical Convergence. These seas are thehaunts of southern elephant seals (Mirounga leonina), several species of albatross, penguinand dozens of other seabirds. In the North Atlantic there is an immense circling current gyre powered in the west bythat great ‘river in the sea’, the Gulf Stream. In the east, the Canary Current flows southalong the African coast before turning west above the equator and heading for the WestIndies. Coriolis forces push water to the right from these circling currents, piling it up tothe left of centre of the gyre in a region known as the Sargasso Sea. This sea is a giantconvergence zone that accumulates drifting material from coast and main. It is namedafter the floating strings of Sargassumweed that dot its surface and sometimes coalesceinto vast floating mats. Species like loggerhead (Caretta caretta)and green turtles(Chelonia mydas)ride the gyre and feed among the relative bounty of the Sargasso.In 1992, astronauts in the space shuttle spotted a line in the sea drawn across the mid-Pacific. By chance, oceanographers were in the region and able to investigate. Theyfound a convergence zone that had concentrated plankton in a streak ten kilometres wideand several hundreds long. The line marked the boundary between the North and SouthEquatorial Currents. At sea, it was visible as a region of breaking, turbulent waves andbright green water rich in diatoms. William Beebe, the explorer and naturalist of the early20thcentury described crossing such a convergence zone in the Pacific in his book TheArcturus Adventure(Beebe 1926):“At seven-thirty, after sounding, temperatures, and breakfast, I went on the bridge andsaw a very distinct line in the water to the north. The captain said we had been steamingparallel to it since dawn. I had the Arcturus turned toward it at once, and found theSargasso Sea of the Pacific, only in this instance it was a wall of water, against which allthe floating jetsam for miles and miles was drifted and held. ...When we first detected therip we were in 2o36' North Latitude, and 85oWest Longitude, which placed us about twohundred miles southeast of Cocos Island. When I approached within the possibility of more accurate examination, I saw that theline, which stretched from horizon to horizon, extended in a northeast and southwestdirection. On our side, the south, the water showed dark and rough, but much lighter andsmoother to the north. When the Arcturus was at last actually astraddle of the rip, I sawit as a narrow line of foam, zigzagging across the placid sea, with spouting white-capsshooting up through the froth that marked the meeting place of the great ocean currents.”12©Greenpeace/MizukoshiToday convergence zones like this also concentrate less natural debris. A person sailingthrough a convergence zone would see bobbing chunks of hardened tar, plastic bottles, discarded rubber shoes and lumps of Styrofoam. Although such rubbish is troubling, itseems benign compared to the great floating bales of monofilament netting that were oncedrift nets, and endless kilometres of twisted longline bristling with hooks. Some of thisjunk still remains lethal to marine life, entangling and often killing birds, mammals, turtles and fish.Hotspots of life on the high seas attract fishers who home in on places teeming with fish insearch of a good catch. Boris Worm and his colleagues from Dalhousie University inCanada have analysed data from the Japanese longline fishery to see what they tell usabout the distribution of animals in the high seas (Worm et al. 2005). They reveal concentrations of marine life, picking out regions where animals are abundant and diverse.Not surprisingly, some of these places coincide with regions where productivity gets aboost, such as convergence zones between warm and cold currents. The findings ofWorm’s team are shown in Appendix 1, Figure 6. But the places with the greatest varietyof big fish are not necessarily the same as those with the most fish. Productivity and variety are not closely coupled. According to these authors, this offers a way of findingplaces to protect that are critical to high seas species without needing to shut down thefisheries that exploit them. Examples of biodiversity hotspots include the westernSargasso Sea north of the Bahamas; the region south of Hawaii; the southeast Pacific,and the northwest Pacific bounded by the Kuroshio Current. Later in this report, we useWorm et al.’s findings to help design our global network of marine reserves.4.2  The deep seaThe deep sea is the most widespread habitat on Earth. Waters more than a thousandmetres deep cover 62% of the planet, or 87% of the sea (Gage and Tyler 1991). Creaturesthat inhabit the deep sea live in permanent inky darkness. Many of them communicatewith flashes of light produced by bioluminescent organs, which makes this form of communication, according to the oceanographer Sylvia Earle, the most common means ofanimal signalling on the planet. Much of the deep sea is blanketed in sediment. Sedimentsaccumulate in areas close to continents where rivers pump mud into the sea. They alsobuild up as a result of the sinking bodies of organisms that live in the sunlit surface waterswhere photosynthesis takes place. Beneath regions where surface productivity is high sediment can build up relatively fast. But some areas – especially far offshore over thevast abyssal plains – have extremely slow rates of sediment accumulation, amounting toonly a few millimetres per million years.13©GreenpeaceAnimals that live in mud dominate the deep sea. Endless ranks of delicate crinoids wavetheir primordial tentacles across grey ooze. Sea cucumbers creep over the bottom, siftingmud for nourishment like submarine earthworms. Countless worms – flat ones, roundones, feathered ones and serrated – conduct their business unseen beneath the monotonoussurface. The supremacy of mud is only broken occasionally; where mountains rise from theocean floor, along the spreading ridges where oceans are created, and in hotspots wherevolcanoes break through the crust. In these places sediment yields to rock. At seamounts,normally sluggish deep-sea currents accelerate as they pass over and around the obstacles.These currents keep the slopes clear of sediment, exposing rocks that are colonised bycorals, sponges, seafans, hydroids and multitudes of other encrusting invertebrates.Illuminated by the beams of a submersible, these coral gardens wrap the rocks in gorgeous cloaks of great antiquity.Life in the deep is slow. With few exceptions, animals that live on the deep-sea bed aredependent on scraps trickling down from sunlit waters far above. This rain of organic matter affords them meagre fare. The water in which they live is icy cold, a few degreesabove zero at most, and their metabolic rates are correspondingly slow. Growth rates areglacial, but for most creatures, their creeping pace of life is compensated by great longevity. Seafans and corals attached to seamounts may only grow millimetres per year,but ages of hundreds sometimes thousands of years have been estimated for corals thattower metres above their rocky plinths.As well as providing for coral growth, seamounts have a great influence over other life inthe high seas. Where they rise near to the surface they can throw off circling current gyresthat drag nutrients from the deep toward sunlit waters. This stimulates plankton growth,and these patches of high production attract fish, birds and marine mammals to feed.Tunas use seamounts as waypoints and refuelling stations in their transoceanic crossings.For deepwater animals too, seamounts provide a boost to productivity. The continuous flowof water over their slopes and summits brings nutrients and food that can sustain largepopulations of firm-fleshed fish.Underwater hot springs – hydrothermal vents – are often found in close association withseamounts along spreading ridges where new rock wells to the surface, like that in themid-Atlantic. Hydrothermal vents shocked scientists when they were first discovered nearthe Galapagos in 1977. Spewing fountains of black, mineral laden water superheated to300oC, they create extreme conditions amid the frigid sea. The greatest surprise of thesetoxic oases was the abundance of life they support. Crabs and shrimps seethe among thebelching chimneys while tall waving worms with blood red gills, stark white clams andmussels crust the rock. Such animals prove an exception to the rule that there is noprimary production in the deep sea, as they harness microbes to synthesise energy fromthe breakdown of hydrogen sulphide. 14©Greenpeace©Greenpeace/Newman15©NOA and MBARI©Greenpeace/Newman©Greenpeace/WesterskovSince the discovery of hydrothermal vents, scientists have found other exotic habitats.They include methane seeps where microbes harness energy from methane to sustainextraordinary communities of creatures. In northern seas, cold-water coral reefs andsponge beds have amazed researchers by their richness, supporting as many species ofcoral as reefs in the tropics. The new discoveries have turned on its head the long heldidea that the deep sea supports only a few species and that they are very widespread.Sampling of seamounts in the southwestern Pacific showed that a quarter to a third ofspecies were unique to closely spaced mountain ranges (Richer de Forges et al. 2000).Different seamount ranges, hydrothermal vent fields and deep ocean trenches all supportunique collections of species, many with narrowly restricted distributions.The time has come to end the popular misconception that the high seas are a barren saltwilderness. We now know that they support extraordinary communities of creatures,bizarre, beautiful, grotesque, diverse, alarming and succulent. The high seas are placesthat are worthy of protection and should be cherished for our own and for future generations.5.History of exploitation of the high seasFor most of human history, the high seas have been of little interest to fishers. While therewere plenty of fish in shallow seas close to coastlines, there was little point in venturinginto the open oceans to fish. Why risk the danger, not to mention the greater expense offishing far out at sea, especially when the rewards were generally less than could beobtained closer to home? The high seas were places to cross, not to go fishing.Nevertheless, some animals were hunted there. The first high seas fisheries were for great whales. These began in the late 18th centuryonce coastal populations had been depleted around the northern rim of the Atlantic Ocean.United States whalers operating from New England were the first to venture into the mid-Atlantic in pursuit of sperm whales. By the end of the 1700s voyages lasted three tofour years, as boats literally circled the planet to fill their holds with oil, whalebone andambergris. For most of the 19thcentury, whalers scoured the high seas in search of theirquarry. But then whales grew scarce and with the development of cheap mineral oils andgas in the late 1800s, the industry began to decline. However, the rise of steam power anddiesel in the late 19thand early 20thled to a revival of whaling by enabling boats toincrease their speed and so catch the faster swimming fin whales, which had previouslybeen inaccessible. Subsequently, the whaling industry embarked on a suicidal course ofeliminating its quarry, species by species, place by place, until a halt was called to allcommercial whaling in 19861.Catching fish from the high seas only became commercially viable with the development ofcanning technology in the late 19thcentury. The early fisheries were conducted seasonallywhen migratory species like tunas and swordfish came near to coasts to feed and breed. InCalifornia and New England, the fisheries targeted animals like bluefin tuna and albacore.Zane Grey, the American author and avid big game fisherman, described the scenesaround California’s Santa Catalina Island in the summer of 1917:“Barracuda and white sea-bass showed up in big schools; the oceanappeared to be full of albacore; yellowtail began to strike all along theisland shores and even in the bay of Avalon; almost every day in Julysight of broadbill swordfish was reported, sometimes as many as ten in aday; in August the blue-fin tuna surged in, school after school, in vastnumbers; and in September returned the Marlin, or roundbill swordfishthat royal-purple swashbuckler of the Pacific.” (Grey 1919)1The global moratorium on commercial whaling came into effect in 1986. Japan andmore recently Iceland, have undertaken limited commercial whaling since then underthe guise of scientific research. Norway holds an objection to the moratorium andcontinues to hunt commercially.16©GreenpeaceBut in Zane Grey’s time, it was for sporting interest rather than for meat that big fishwere highly prized. It is hard to believe today, when individual blue-fin tuna can sell fortens of thousands of dollars, that the meat then fetched only a few cents per pound andwas often used for pet food. The real spread of fishing into the high seas came after theSecond World War when post-war food shortages bit hard. Soviet and Japanese wartimeshipping fleets were converted for high seas fishing, and began to fan out across thePacific in pursuit of tuna, swordfish and marlin. By the mid-1950s the Japanese fleetfished the entire western Pacific, from the Sea of Japan to the Australian coast, east toHawaii and French Polynesia. By 1960, they had crossed the Indian Ocean and penetratedthe Atlantic, fishing a swathe of equatorial water from Brazil to West Africa. By 1970they fished the entire globe, spanning the Pacific from west to east, the Indian Ocean, andthe Atlantic from Newfoundland to the Falkland Islands.Surface living fish were not the only ones to attract interest. During the 1960s and 1970s,Soviet and Japanese fleets experimented with deep water fishing technology. Speciallyadapted trawls probed deep slopes flanking the edge of continents and raked the summitsof seamounts in waters more than a thousand metres deep. Deepwater fishing provedhugely lucrative, and at its peak, trawl fleets landed tens of thousands of tonnes per yearof valuable species like pelagic armorhead (Pseudopentaceros wheeleri)and orange roughy(Hoplostethus atlanticus). Over the last twenty years of the 20thcentury, deepwater bottom trawling expanded across the planet. Bottom trawlers were joined by deepwaterlongliners and gillnetters, allowing fishers to penetrate into new areas and catch newspecies.6.Present status and threats to life on the highseas6.1  FishingFishing is by far the greatest threat to biodiversity on the high seas today. Since the end ofthe Second World War, the high seas have been subject to increasing levels of fishing.Both bottom fish in deep water and shallow water pelagic species like tuna and billfishhave been targeted and stocks of both have plummeted. Tuna and billfish numbers havecollapsed, falling by 90% or more since the 1950s (Myers and Worm 2003). A recentassessment showed that the high seas are being impoverished and the diversity of thesefish has declined by between 10 and 50% since the 1950s, depending on the area (Wormet al. 2005).All over the planet, deep seamounts and continental slopes now bear scars marking thepassage of trawls. Seamounts subjected to bottom trawling have been stripped of rich anddelicate coral and sponge forests that may have taken thousands of years to develop. Inthe case of these hard bottom habitats, the damage done is extremely slow to recover andit may be centuries before the scars heal. Even over muddy bottoms, biological and physical processes operate so slowly in the deep sea that scars are apparent for years ordecades. Devine et al. (2006) recently found that declines in deep-sea fish stocks had beenso severe since the onset of fishing off the Canadian east coast that many target speciesqualify as being Critically Endangered according to criteria developed by The WorldConservation Union (IUCN).Fisheries on the high seas are governed by a bewildering array of Regional FisheryManagement Organisations (RFMOs). These organisations have different remits in termsof the fish species and depth range over which they have jurisdiction. Some have a mandate to manage stocks from the surface to the seabed, while others are only taskedwith managing migratory species such as tunas. Some areas of the high seas lack any governance by a RFMO. The performance of RFMOs in protecting even the fisheries they17are tasked with managing, has been disappointing,on the whole. For example, the InternationalCommission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunashas presided for the last twenty-seven years over amore than ninety percent decline in the abundanceof bluefin tuna (Thunnus thynnus). Most RFMOs suffer from serious problems of illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing withintheir areas. Vessels flying flags of conveniencecompromise efforts to conserve fish stocks, and ithas been estimated that as much as half of thetotal catch of species like the Patagonian toothfish(Dissostichus eleginoides)may be taken illegally. It is surprising then that some RFMOs haverepeatedly failed to prosecute known infringementsby vessels operating under their oversight.Management by many RFMOs is failing to safeguard either fisheries or the environment.6.2  Global warmingGlobal change is affecting the high seas like everyother habitat on the planet. Rising temperaturesand changing salinity patterns are leading to alteration of ocean currents. For example, increasing freshwater runoff into the Arctic Oceannorth of Europe and Russia is reducing sinking of seawater into the deep planetary circulation and weakening the Gulf Stream. Changes in current patterns like this mayhave major feedback effects on climate, but they are also certain to affect marine life.Another impact of great concern is the acidification of the ocean as a result of rising concentrations of CO2in the atmosphere. Higher acidity could interfere with calcificationby zooplankton, with unpredictable but probably detrimental consequences. Marinereserves will not prevent such impacts occurring but they may mitigate some of the negative consequences. Protection from exploitation may help organisms maintain largerpopulations that can offset the added stress or mortality from global change processes. Itmay also be possible for us to move marine reserves over time, tracking shifts in currentpatterns and other oceanographic features, as we discuss below.6.3  Disposal of CO2Worryingly some countries have proposed dumping liquid CO2in the deep ocean as atechnical solution to curbing the levels of CO2entering the atmosphere, despite no realidea of how this will impact the marine environment. What we do know is that any CO2dumped in the ocean will eventually make its way back to the atmosphere, it’s just a question of when. This could take thousands of years or happen almost immediately.6.4  Oil and mineral exploitationUntil very recently, deep-sea areas, which mean most of the high seas, have been tooexpensive to exploit for their mineral wealth. For mining and petroleum companies, thereseemed little point looking for minerals and oil in deep water while more accessibleresources were readily available from continental shelves. But many oil and gas fields oncontinental shelves, like those of the North Sea, are nearing the end of their productivelives and other sources must be found. Oil companies are also taking an interest in newresources from the deep sea that could supply energy, like methane gas hydrate deposits. 18©Greenpeace/Behring19© Greenpeace/Grace© Greenpeace/Grace©Greenpeace/ReynaersIt may soon become cost effective to mine from the deep sea when terrestrial sources ofminerals become scarce. In particular, mining companies have their eyes set on hydrothermal vent fields. Ancient hydrothermal vents uplifted from the ocean floor, inplaces like Canada and Cyprus, represent some of the richest sources of metals in theworld. Underwater vent fields, both active and inactive, are tempting targets.6.5  BioprospectingRecent technological advances have caused bioprospecting – the exploitation of geneticresources for both scientific and commercial purposes – to take off in the marine contextwith a special interest being taken in the properties of those organisms inhabiting thedepths of the high seas. Many of these deep sea species have developed unique biologicaland physiological characteristics that enable them to survive in very cold, dark and highlypressurised environments. The biochemicals found in these animals and micro-organismscould prove to be integral in developing new products for use in the health, pharmacology,environmental and chemical sectors. However these organisms and ecosystems are highlyvulnerable to potential detrimental impacts including over-harvesting, pollution and habitat disturbance.6.6  NoiseNoise levels in the sea have increased by several orders of magnitude since just a centuryago. Where sailing ships once caught the wind, today’s ships throb their way across thewaves, booming out low frequency noise that travels tens or hundreds of kilometres. Sonarpings – much louder than the term suggests – fill the oceans. Oil and gas companiesexplode seismic charges in intermittent barrages that can kill or permanently deafenmarine mammals, and perhaps other species, that come too close. The world’s navies aretesting ever more powerful sonar to detect submarines, with little thought for the consequences to marine life. Even if an animal is not exposed to injurious levels of noise,the sheer background clamour may interfere with communication or smother signals thatmay be critical to navigation or survival. Nowhere in the oceans is free of human generated noise any more and marine reserves will not change that. However, reservescould provide havens from which the most injurious forms of sound production are excluded.7.Designing a global marine reserve network for the high seas7.1  Marine reserves and why they are neededFully protected marine reserves are places that are protected from all fishing and otherextractive or harmful human uses, such as mining and drilling for oil. They are also protected from harm by other causes, so far as it is possible, such as pollution.Recreational boating, passage of shipping etc. are permitted up to levels that do not harmthe environment. Marine reserve status does not interfere with the right of innocent passage embodied in the UN Law of the Sea. However, reserves may require additionalrestrictions on shipping where such areas are also designated as Particularly Sensitive SeaAreas. High seas marine reserves are unlikely to attract much recreational use since theyare generally inaccessible and lack the easily approachable animal life that shallowcoastal seas often possess. The main source of harm that high seas marine reserves mustoffer protection against is fishing, in both its legal and illegal, unreported and unregulated(IUU) forms. In future, as more accessible oil, gas and mineral resources are depleted,they will also need to offer protection from drilling and mining. There are, however, somekinds of harm that marine reserves cannot counter, such as global warming and highlymobile pollutants from distant sources. It will require action at regional or global scalesto benefit species and habitats occurring in the high seas, though healthier ecosystems20such as those protected by large-scale marine reserves are likely to be more resilient.As outlined in Sections 5 and 6.1, fishing impacts on the high seas and deep sea aresevere and growing. Since the onset of industrial scale fishing a little over fifty years ago,high seas fish stocks have been plundered. Fewer than one in ten of the big, pelagic fish atlarge on the high seas at the end of the Second World War are present today. Figures arecloser to one in a hundred, and even one in a thousand for the most severely depletedspecies. The same scales of loss apply in the deep sea. The isolation of the high seas anddeep sea no longer put these environments beyond human harm. They urgently need protection.Some decision makers, fisheries managers and scientists have questioned whether marinereserves are the right way to protect life and habitats on the high seas. Would othermeasures that restrain fishing be better? For example, the United Nations implemented aglobal moratorium on the use of drift nets on the high seas that came into effect in 19922. A large number of conservation organisations, including Greenpeace, have joinedtogether in the last two years to call for a global moratorium on bottom trawling on thehigh seas (www.savethehighseas.org). Their contention, supported by extensive anddetailed evidence, is that this fishing method is destructive and wasteful. A global moratorium on deep sea bottom trawling would indeed be better than protecting someareas in marine reserves and trawling the rest to oblivion. However, the response to thisproposal at the United Nations has been mixed. Some countries favour a moratorium,while pro-fishing nations such as Iceland and Japan oppose it. In the centre ground, somenations favour a partial ban. This would prohibit bottom trawling on a case-by-case basisin areas of the high seas proven to have habitats that are vulnerable to damage by trawling, and in places where there is no competent regional fisheries management organisation that can regulate deep-sea fishing. Such a proposal would essentially meanidentifying vulnerable areas for protection as partial marine reserves. To make this proposal work would certainly mean introducing an interim moratorium on high seas bottom trawling while vulnerable areas are identified. If it were not, many sensitive areaswould be destroyed before protection could be given to them because the pace of damageby trawling is so great.One problem with implementing fishing restrictions like the UN drift net ban, is that theycan have unintended consequences. Since this ban came into force, the intensity of highseas longline fishing has greatly increased with the result that it has  put leatherback andloggerhead turtles at risk of extinction. So parlous is the plight of the leatherback that in2005 some conservationists called on the United Nations to introduce a moratorium onhigh seas longlining to prevent its extinction. The call attracted sympathy from manycountry delegations but was rejected due to concern for and pressure from the fishingindustry. In the case of longlining, arguments for a complete ban on the practice are lessclear-cut than for deep sea bottom trawling. Again, there is greater support for a partialban, which would mean identifying areas where turtles are particularly vulnerable and giving them protection from fishing through time and area closures.7.2  Will marine reserves protect species on the high seas?The most frequent criticism of using marine reserves on the high seas is that species thereare too mobile to gain sufficient protection. Animals like tunas, forexample, are the ultimate planetary wanderers. Bluefin and albacorecross oceans and in the Pacific undertake an eighteen thousand kilometre round trip every year. Albatrosses wander the oceansfor half the year covering tens of thousands of kilometres. Single provisioning trips for their young may span several thousand kilometres.Not all species are this mobile, but many range over hundreds to morethan a thousand kilometres. How then can anything other than impractically large marine reserves offer sufficient protection?21©Greenpeace/Grace2The moratorium applies to all drift nets greater than 2.5 miles long.The key to success is to protect species in the places and times that they most need it. Marine reserves can safeguard species where and when they are aggregated or are otherwise particularly vulnerable to human impact, such as breeding sites, nurserygrounds or migration bottlenecks. On land we are very familiar with the idea of using protected areas to safeguard highly migratory species. Dozens of migratory birds arriveand depart each year as they move between breeding and over-wintering habitats. We protect their breeding sites and their resting and refuelling spots along the way. This strategy is also used in the sea. For nearly a century, fishery managers have protected thebreeding sites of migratory species like herring and capelin when they gather in coastalshallows to spawn. They also protect juvenile nursery habitats to ensure that animals areable to grow undisturbed to marketable sizes.Many high seas migratory species come close to coasts at some stage of their lives. Birds,turtles, seals and sea lions (pinnipeds) must come to land to breed. They can benefit fromprotected areas in national waters and on land. But there are also places on the high seasthat support remarkable and predictable concentrations of life. Some of them are fixed,such as zones of high productivity around seamounts. Others are mobile, snaking aroundsome general area of ocean at the whim of weather and currents or, like spinning eddies,may simply drift off then dissipate. These areas, as we described in Section 4.1, can behighly productive, such as upwellings and convergence zones between currents, and candraw animals from far afield to feed or breed. In other places, phenomena like downwellings, may concentrate plants and animals passively. Drifting rafts of plants, flotsam and jetsam can become important features enhancing productivity, acting sheltersand nurseries for animals, which in turn attract others to feed on them.Protecting mobile features on the high seas presents more of a challenge than protectingfixed locations like seamounts or fields of hydrothermal vents. In some places it may befeasible to create large enough marine reserves to incorporate most of the temporal variability in the location of these features. In others, this may not be possible. However,today’s technologies provide the means by which we can both identify and protect important places as they move. Satellite sensors highlight areas of high chlorophyll concentration that indicate blooming plankton. Measures of sea surface height pick outcurrents and convergence zones, as do steep gradients in sea surface temperature.Thermal data also show upwellings and coiling eddies. At present, satellite data are fed tofishing fleets either by national governments or private companies to guide boats to theplaces where it is known that fish will be concentrated. In the same way it would be a simple matter for governments to inform fishing fleets about that day, week or month’sposition of designated mobile high seas marine reserves (Norse et al. 2005). In the sameway, mobile marine reserves could be used to protect migrating species like turtles thatfollow predictable routes across the oceans. Fixed and mobile marine reserves would alsobenefit species such as birds that risk being killed in places where fishing operations areunderway. In some places, marine reserves may promote the creation of oceanic hotspotsof life, by allowing forage species to build in abundance and thereby attracting migratoryanimals to feed on them.22©Greenpeace/Visser©GreenpeaceMarine reserves will meet some of the conservation and management needs of highlymobile and migratory species, but in most cases will not be sufficient on their own. Wherespecies remain subject to moderate or high levels of threat outside protected areas, therewill need to be supplementary management, such as additional fishing restrictions implemented by Regional Fishery Management Organisations.7.3  Identifying candidate sites for protectionIn this report we identify candidate sites for a global network of high seas marinereserves. In seeking suitable places to protect, our primary objective has been to find andprioritise for protection places with high intrinsic biological value. Complementing thissearch for the places most prolific in quantity and variety of life, we sought to achieve representation of the full spectrum of biological diversity. To attain these ends, weemployed three main data gathering approaches:(1) We assembled maps of physical and biological data and brought them into a common format using the ArcInfo 3.3 ® Geographic Information System (GIS) program;(2) We created our own maps of use of the high seas by aquatic megafauna,drawingon data in numerous separate studies and reviews;(3) We consulted with experts in marine science and management,requesting them to nominate sites they believe should be afforded protection.All the above sources of information were used to identify candidate sites for protectionand to design a global network of high seas marine reserves. Full details of data layers aregiven in Appendix 1. We offer a few comments on each approach below.(1) Mapping physical and biological dataWe have brought together information from a wide variety of sources pertaining to thehigh seas. They include data showing species richness and species density of large pelagicfish species (billfish and tunas, Worm et al. 2005), sea surface temperature gradient(which identifies areas of mixing of cold and warm water masses), and the location ofupwelling and downwelling areas, and bottom sediment types. We also obtained data onseamount distribution (www.seaaroundus.org), marine biomes and bathymetry. From thebathymetry data we calculated bottom complexity, a measure of habitat heterogeneitythought to relate to high benthic biodiversity (Ardron et al. 2002), and have identifiedocean trench habitats.(2) Air-breathing aquatic megafaunaLarge and mobile animals seek out places on the high seas that are rich in their prey.Their movements can guide us to concentrations of marine life. We gathered and mappeddata from dozens of studies of the movements of air-breathing aquatic megafauna, including albatrosses, pinnipeds, penguins and turtles. In particular, we sought data fromstudies using satellite, radio-tracking or data loggers to reveal high seas movements ofthese species. However, since there are insufficient data to be fully comprehensive, we concentrated on species for which there were good data and that spend significantamounts of their time on the high seas. We also developed maps showing species richnessof cetaceans (whales, dolphins and porpoises) across the world.(3) Expert consultationWe wrote to 404 experts on marine science and conservation asking them to nominate oneor more candidate sites deserving high priority for protection on the high seas. We alsorequested they provided justification for their choice and send us supporting documentation, if any was available. We received replies from around sixty-six 2324©Greenpeace/Standbury©Greenpeace/Reynaers©Greenpeace/Loor(Appendix 2). Experts nominated a wide range of sites (Appendix 3), but there was alsoconsiderable consistency in their suggestions. In particular, seamounts and convergencezones between currents received multiple nominations for protection.7.4  The gridWe entered our data into the ArcInfo 3.3 ® GIS and gridded on a 5olatitude by 5olongitude grid. We chose this grid size for two reasons. Firstly, we think that 5ox 5ocorresponds to the minimum viable area for a high seas marine reserve, although weaccept that the area included in cells of this grid do vary with latitude. One grid cell corresponds to an area of approximately 560 x 560 km at the equator, or 314,000 km2,with the longitudinal dimension diminishing towards the poles. Between 70oN and 75oN,for example, each cell covers 93,600 km2. To facilitate easy identification, complianceand enforcement, it is essential that reserves on the high seas have straight edges and aredemarcated based on latitude and longitude. This way the boundaries can easily be locatedwith the global positioning systems used on boats. The only exceptions to this will likely bein areas adjoining the exclusive economic zone(s) of one or more countries.The second reason for choosing a 5ogrid is because some of the data layers we used havea relatively coarse resolution. In addition, many processes important to generating biological patterns on the high seas vary in space over time. Fine scale mapping, forexample on a 1ogrid, would be unjustified. The 5oresolution is relatively robust to dataerrors and temporal variation.At its edges, many cells of the grid incorporate parts of national exclusive economic zones.In addition, we have included grid cells across large parts of the high seas that lie withinthe exclusive economic zones of island nations or island dependencies of other countries.We believe that much of the seas surrounding these islands are virtually indistinguishablein biology from areas further offshore. Many of these islands, especially isolated and oftenuninhabited places in the Southern Ocean, are critical habitat for species that use the highseas. Protecting these species will require conservation strategies that include the islandsas well as regions of the high seas used by the species.8.Principles of marine reserve networkingA network (1) should be representative of the full range of biodiversity, (2) should replicate habitats in different marine reserves, (3) should be designed so that populationsin different marine reserves can interact and be mutually supporting, (4) should be sufficiently large to ensure long-term persistence of species, habitats, ecological processesand services, and (5) should be based on the best available scientific, local and traditionalinformation.8.1  Site selectionProtected area selection must aim for broad representation of the full spectrum of biodiversity. It should not be driven, as it has been to date, simply by the need to protectthreatened species or habitats. Habitat representation and protection of threatened speciesare dual objectives for protected area networks, not mutually exclusive ones. Fishing andother human activities have highly modified habitats and their associated ecological communities on the high seas and in the deep sea. Therefore, in selecting representativesites, the emphasis must be on seeking to recover and restore those sites to a more natural, little disturbed state, not on maintaining them in their present condition. At thenetwork scale, the aim should be to provide the conditions for expansion in the ranges ofspecies that have previously been seriously depleted, and to accommodate changes inrange as environmental conditions change. 258.2  Networking and connectivityA protected area network needs to be greater thanthe sum of its parts. The emphasis in coastal seas,with a few notable exceptions such as theAustralian Great Barrier Reef, has so far been onselecting sites to protect specific attributes withlittle consideration given to how those sitesinteract with others. Management has been sitespecific rather than taking into account how a protected area affects and is affected by others. Acentral objective for a network is to ensure ecological connectivity among protected areaunits. For species that move or disperse widely,populations in marine reserves should be mutuallysupporting. Levels of coverage, replication, sizeand spacing of marine reserves need to be set taking connectivity considerations into account.8.3  Level of replicationHabitats should be replicated in more than oneprotected area in order to buffer against human ornatural catastrophes that may damage or destroypopulations in individual marine reserves.Furthermore, marine reserves cannot be mutuallysupporting unless there are similarities in the habitats and species they contain. The aims ofreplication are to spread the benefits of protection throughout the region, to provide insurance against human and natural impacts, and to ensure ecological connectivityamong marine reserves. How much replication is enough? At present this question has notbeen adequately resolved by science. Roberts and Hawkins (2000) suggested that all habitats should be replicated in at least three marine reserves. This level of replicationwas adopted in the recent rezoning of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park, and wasapplied within three biogeographic subdivisions of the park. However, when very largeareas are involved, low levels of habitat replication in different marine reserves will fail tosecure adequate connectivity. This is because the resulting marine reserves will tend to bevery widely spaced and the distances between them may exceed the dispersal abilities ofmost resident species. Clearly, however, there are constraints on replication. It may onlybe possible to attain low levels of replication for rare and isolated habitats. Higher levelsof replication can be achieved by creating smaller marine reserves, but this could be selfdefeating if such areas are not sufficiently large to sustain populations of resident species(see Size of Marine Reserves, below). 8.4  Spacing of marine reservesScales of ecological linkages in the high seas – i.e. the movement of juveniles and adultorganisms, dispersal of their offspring, and transport of materials – extend from metres tothousands of kilometres. Seamount invertebrates, for example, may disperse only metres,while migratory tunas can undertake journeys of 20,000 kilometres in a year. To ensureecological connectivity in the network, marine reserves with similar habitats should generally be spaced from a few hundreds to a few thousand kilometres apart.8.5  Size of marine reservesThere are no hard and fast rules governing protected area size. Protection goals, habitatdistribution, heterogeneity and patchiness, mobility of species, together with social 26©Greenpeaceconstraints that limit options for protection, must all be considered in decisions on protected area size. However, sizes of marine reserves must be matched to the scales ofmobility of the species in the habitats being considered. At a minimum, marine reservesmust be large enough and numerous enough to support long-term viable populations of themajority of species at a network level. For some species, populations will be viable at thelevel of individual marine reserves. For more mobile and widely dispersing species, theaim is to achieve viability across the sum of marine reserves making up the network. Tworules of thumb are that marine reserves should be as large as possible given social constraints, and they should generally increase in size from nearshore to offshore environments. High seas marine reserves should therefore be at the large end of the sizespectrum to encompass movement scales of the organisms that inhabit the offshore realm.In this study, we have adopted a minimum reserve size of 5olatitude x 5olongitude. Atthe equator, this represents a size of approximately 560km x 560km, or 314,000km2. Werecognize in doing this that the size of 5ox 5ocells will decrease approaching the poles.While the latitudinal dimension remains unchanged regardless of latitude, the longitudinaldimension decreases polewards. 8.6  Coverage of marine reservesThe World Parks Congress in 2003 recommended that at least 20-30% of all marinehabitats should be included in networks of marine reserves (World Parks CongressRecommendation 22, 2003). There are good scientific arguments for taking an even moreprecautionary approach, since higher levels of protection can be required to maintain theintegrity of marine ecosystem processes. Gell and Roberts (2003) reviewed nearly fortystudies examining how much of the sea should be protected. The majority of studies concluded that between 20 and 50% of the sea should be protected to achieve the conservation of viable populations, support fisheries management, secure ecosystemprocesses and assure sufficient connectivity between marine reserves in networks. Giventhe large scales of oceanic processes and species’ movements on the high seas, a high levelof protection is warranted. In this report, we have adopted the goal of protecting 40% ofall habitats on the high seas.Some habitats will require greater proportional protection than others. A larger fractionof habitat should be protected for isolated and regionally rare habitats, than for regionallyextensive and widespread habitats. This is because the former will be more dependent onself-recruitment to sustain populations. If habitats are damaged or species’ populationscollapse, more widespread habitats have greater opportunities for recovery by recolonisation from distant source populations than do isolated or rare habitats. Some habitats warrant total protection. They include places for which the nature anddegree of threats to them mean that any areas left unprotected will be destroyed or damaged beyond recognition, and where the recovery time following damage is lengthy.Deep-water habitats such as seamounts, ridges and canyons are among those that warrantcomplete protection (Merrett and Haedrich 1997, Roberts 2002, MCBI 2004). Theirresources are currently being mined as if they were non-renewable resources. Any areasleft unprotected will be destroyed by present fishing practices. There is little prospect ofreforming deep sea fishing practices to try and achieve sustainability, since industrialscale fisheries are so expensive to run that they would be unprofitable at the levelsrequired for a sustainable fishing effort (Roberts 2002).Text in this section adapted from: Roberts, C.M., F.R. Gell, and J.P. Hawkins (2003) ProtectingNationally Important Marine Areas in the Irish Sea Pilot Project Region. Report to the Department ofthe Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, UK. www.jncc.gov.uk/page-2847 279.Procedure used for computer-assisted design ofa network of marine reservesMarxanis the most widely used computer program for designing networks of marinereserves and has been instrumental in rezoning the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park inAustralia and the California Channel Islands National Marine Sanctuary in the UnitedStates (Airame et al. 2003). Marxanworks by selecting sites for protection to create networks that meet user-defined conservation targets while trying to minimise costs. Thecosts included are generally proxies for real financial costs and include measures of thearea and boundary length of reserves within the network. Costs increase with area to beprotected but there are economies of scale that can be achieved by creating fewer, largerreserves, compared to many small reserves that cover the same area (Balmford et al.2004). Adding the total boundary length of marine reserves in a network represents aproxy for this economy since as reserves increase in area, the boundary length increasesless quickly. The less boundary there is for a given total area protected, the more clumpedreserves are and thus the less expensive the network is to create and manage. To use Marxan, the area being considered for protection has to be split into units of area,referred to as planning units. Features that are to be represented in the reserve networkare then mapped, such as seamounts, presence of species of conservation interest, and biogeographic zones. Undesirable qualities can also be mapped, such as fishing intensityor pollution levels. For each planning unit the amount of each feature is calculated. Insome cases direct area measures can be used, while for other features, such as use bybirds or turtles, scoring systems may be developed and each planning unit scored for thefeature (such as that used in this report for air-breathing aquatic megafauna). TheMarxanuser then sets a target for how much of each feature is required in the network. If the network does not meet a particular target then a penalty is applied. Any penaltiesare ultimately added to the total cost for a reserve network. Hence network designs thatdo not meet the conservation targets can be considered as expensive options. Marxanworks towards ‘good’ network solutions iteratively. It begins with a ‘seed solution’which is usually a random pick of planning units. It then adds and subtracts planning unitsin a pre-determined number of iterations (usually several thousand). For each iteration thecost of the network is calculated, which is the area, plus the boundary, plus any penaltyfor not meeting the conservation targets. Advantageous changes are retained. In this waythe program seeks to meet the conservation targets with the smallest total area protectedand the smallest boundary length. In Marxana ‘Boundary Length Modifier’ can be set to limit the overall boundary lengthof sites that are selected. This forces the program to seek less expensive network solutionswith fewer, larger marine reserves rather than many small areas. At the outset of a Marxan run, priority sites for protection can be locked in, and undesirable areas locked out. Marxan can be run many times to provide alternativemarine reserve network designs for any given set of targets. From these, a selection frequency or ‘irreplaceability value’ can be calculated for each planning unit, indicating itsrelative importance to meeting the given targets. This value may be useful in decidingwhich planning units are high priorities for protection.28©Greenpeace©Greenpeace9.1  Features and targets used for Marxan analysesThe aims of the network design process outlined below are to select sites that will protectthe richest and most vulnerable concentrations of high seas marine life, represent the fullspectrum of high seas biodiversity, represent all habitat types in different marine reserves,and include forty percent of the high seas in marine reserves.Oceanographic Features1. Upwellings and downwellings:We calculated the area of three upwelling and downwelling types: major upwelling zones, areas where intermediate waters form and sink, and areas where deep and bottom waters form and sink.  We then set a target of representing 40% of the area of each type in the network.2. Sea surface temperature gradient:used to identify fronts, convergence zones and upwellings. We took the top 10% of cell scores for steepness of their temperature gradient, and then set a target of representing 40% of these cells in the network.Physical features1. Bathymetry:Depth data were divided into five strata: 0-200m (continental shelves/epipelagic zone); 201-1000m (mesopelagic zone); 1001-4000m (bathypelagic zone); 4001-6000m (abyssopelagic zone); > 6000m (hadalpelagic zone). We then set a target of representing 40% of each depth zone in the network.2. Bathymetric complexity:We scored each cell for its bathymetric complexity then split the scores into four categories (high to low complexity) and identified all the cells that contained high complexity (see Ardron et al. 2002 for method). We thenset a target of representing 40% of the total number of high complexity cells in the network.3. Seamounts:We calculated the number of seamounts in each cell then set a target of including 40% of all seamounts in the network.4. Bottom sediments:We calculated the area of different bottom sediments in each cell and then set the target of representing 40% of the total area of each sedimenttype in the network.5. Ocean trenches:We calculated the area of ocean trenches (places > 6250 m deep) and aimed to represent 40% of their area in the network.Biological data1. At sea movements of albatrosses, turtles, pinnipeds and penguins:We scored eachcell for use by each of the four different taxa. The scores were then normalised to a range of 0-1, added across the four taxa, and then divided by the number of taxa contributing to that score. We then set a target of representing 40% of the top scoring 25% of cells in the network.2. Biodiversity distribution of cetaceans:we scored each cell for species richness of three groups of cetaceans (baleen whales; toothed whales excluding dolphins; dolphins) and ranked them by score. We then set a target of representing 40% of the top scoring 25% of cells in the network for each taxon.3. Billfish and tuna species richness:We identified cells within the top quartile of values for species richness and aimed to represent 40% of them in the network.4. Billfish and tuna species density:We identified cells within the top quartile of values for species density and aimed to represent 40% of them in the network.5. Marine biomes:We calculated the area of each of 12 marine biogeographic zonesin each cell. We set a target of representing 40% of the area of each biome in thenetwork.2930©Greenpeace/Davison©Greenpeace/Culley©GreenpeaceExpert consultation1. We used the results of the expert consultation to lock in certain areas at the outset of the Marxananalyses.For each network design calculated by Marxanwe ran the simulated annealing model1000 times. We repeated this 10,000 times to generate 10,000 different network designs.They were then compared with each other to find the designs that met the targets set mostefficiently. At the end of each run of 10,000 network designs, we calculated the irreplaceability metric for each cell, i.e. the number of times that cell was picked to bepart of a network. We used this irreplaceability statistic to identify high scoring cellswhich should be locked in to the network prior to the next run of Marxan. In this way, weran Marxaniteratively, progressively working towards a final network design that met alltargets set. In the final step, locked in cells covered 36% of the oceans, and the programwas run to select cells to make up the final approximately 4% coverage needed to complete the network. For this final run, we also locked out a small number of cells toprevent Marxanamalgamating nearby protected areas that we preferred to keep separate.10.Design of a network of high seas marine reservesFigure 1 shows the final design of the candidate network of marine reserves. It covers40.8% of the global oceans and includes twenty-nine separate candidate reserves. Thesecover every ocean and include representatives of all twelve ocean biogeographic zones. Thenetwork met all of the targets we set (Table 1). In the Mediterranean, the high seas begin at the boundary of territorial waters, 6 or 12nautical miles from the coast. We have identified two areas in the Mediterranean Sea thathave particularly high biodiversity values, but they are not the only places that warrantprotection. To adequately protect Mediterranean biodiversity a regional network of marinereserves will have to be developed at a finer scale. This is to take account of the finerscale distribution of ecological features and associated human uses compared to the highseas.Like the Mediterranean, Antarctica has no Exclusive Economic Zone, nor does it have territorial waters. The high seas thus begin adjacent to the coast. We have identified several areas of the Antarctic that are high priorities for protection based on their richmarine wildlife. However, there is a case for extending protection to all waters south of60oS, the area covered by the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine LivingResources. Such a protected area could safeguard one of the most pristine environmentsleft on this planet for the benefit of all humanity. Figure 1: Proposed global network of marine reserves. Numbers refer to descriptionsgiven in Section 11.3132Table 1: Targets set for the global network of marine reserves and performance of the network show in Figure 1 against these targets.FeatureTargetAmount Number ofincluded grid cellsin networkwith the featureOcean Area40% of world ocean coverage40.8%549Biogeographic ZonesPacific westerly winds40% of area46.7%59Pacific trade winds40% of area37.2%99Pacific polar40% of area54.6%3Pacific coastal40% of area51.7%29Indian Ocean trade winds40% of area47.5%50Indian Ocean coastal40% of area49.5%13Atlantic westerly winds40% of area46%39Atlantic trade winds40% of area53.7%72Atlantic polar40% of area32.4%66Atlantic coastal40% of area56.8%23Antarctic westerly winds40% of area28.1%91Antarctic polar40% of area37.2%139Bottom typesSediment Clays40% of area39.8%146Sediment Glacial deposits40% of area39.6%105Sediment Continental margins40% of area39.1%134Sediment Siliceous diatom ooze40% of area36.5%86Sediment Siliceous radiolarian ooze40% of area31.9%13Sediment Calcareous ooze40% of area43.9%237Depth 1-200m40% of area33.3%140Depth 201-1000m40% of area51.6%237Depth 1001-4000m40% of area51.1%488Depth 4001-6000m40% of area34.8%437Depth 6000m+40% of area44.1%79Bathymetric complexity40% of the top 25% of cell 401 cells401values (397 cells)Ocean trench area40% of area42.3%35Seamounts3829 seamounts = 40% 3862363of global totalFaunaTuna and billfish species richness40% of the top 25% of cell 22 cells22values (21 cells)Tuna and billfish species density40% of the top 25% of cell 25 cells25values (24 cells)Baleen whale diversity40% of the top 25% of cell 102 cells102values (111 cells)Toothed whale diversity (excl. dolphins)40% of the top 25% of cell 97 cells97values (83 cells)Dolphin diversity40% of the top 25% of cell 51 cells51values (48 cells)Importance for air breathing megafauna (albatross, turtles, penguins and pinnipeds)40% of the top 25% of cell 112 cells112values (75 cells)OceanographySea surface temperature gradient40% top 10% of cell values 9 cells9(10 cells)Major upwellings40% of area46.7%28Zone of deep and bottom water formation40% of area47.9%37Zone of intermediate water formation40% of area43.2%16Deepwater fishing, as we discussed earlier, is one of the major threats to high seas biodiversity. To examine how effective the network would be in protecting deep-sea habitats from fishing we superimposed the 800 – 3000 m depth stratum over the map ofproposed marine reserves. This represents the zone of greatest sensitivity to deepwaterfishing. Bottom trawls and gillnets regularly work to 2000m deep, while longlines penetrate to at least 3000m.Figure 2: Distribution of places sensitive to deep-sea fishing impacts in relation to candidate marine reserves. Red areas are places where the bottom depth lies between 800 and 3000m. Yellow areas are proposed marine reserves.11.Features of selected areas identified for protectionGreenland Sea (1):This candidate marine reserve incorporates a swathe of theGreenland Sea between Svalbard and Eastern Greenland. It supports high levels of summer productivity and is an important feeding area for a variety of whales, seals andwalrus, including hooded and harp seals (Crystophoca cristata) and (Phagophilus groenlandicus).North Atlantic (2):This candidate marine reserve spans the North Atlantic from western Britain to Eastern Canada, including a southward extension west of Spain andPortugal. It includes a significant section of the mid-Atlantic ridge between 50oN and60oN, incorporating the Charlie Gibbs Fracture Zone, making it important for deep-seabottom life. It also includes the Rockall, Hatton and Porcupine Banks, deepwater areas tothe west of the British Isles around 50oN to 60oN. Further south, it incorporates theJosephine and Gorringe Banks off the coast of Spain. Josephine Bank is a current sweptseamount, rising from 3200 m from the abyssal plain to within 170 m of the surface. Itsupports a diverse assemblage of fish, corals and other invertebrates and is a possiblestepping-stone in tuna and turtle migrations. Deep water trawling is seriously impactingthis and other deepwater banks and seamounts that support important deepwater coraland sponge communities. Preliminary video surveys are showing that some banks stillhave pristine coral and other deep-water habitats but the fishing fleets are moving in fastand there is a high risk of these habitats being destroyed imminently. 33The proposed reserve also holds the sub-polar front, a rich summer feeding area for manymigratory fish, birds and mammals, as well as leatherback turtles (Dermochelys coriacea).The reserve includes two shallow water regions off Eastern Canada, the ‘tail’ of the GrandBanks and Flemish Cap. The ‘tail of the bank’ is an important nursery area for cod (Gadusmorhua)and other shallow water fish and currently supports a high intensity internationalfishery with significant removals of undersized fish. Flemish Cap is a shallow water shelfcovering a total area of 58,000 km2 situated outside the Canadian EEZ. It supports themost heterogeneous offshore Atlantic cod population and is a foraging ground for northeastern and western Atlantic bluefin tuna populations (Thunnus thynnus). It is alsovisited by sperm whales (Physeter macrocephalus) among others and may be an importantwintering area for great shearwaters (Puffinus gravis). Flemish Cap is currently intensively trawled.Azores/Mid-Atlantic Ridge (3):This candidate reserve includes a section of the mid-Atlantic ridge that is rich in deep seamounts. It also covers the RainbowHydrothermal Vent Field which is located at 2270-2320 m depth. This comprises morethan thirty groups of active small sulphide chimneys over an area of fifteen square kilometres. About thirty-two different vent species have so far been recorded in theRainbow area. The small spatial extent and site-specific communities make the vent fieldhighly vulnerable to the increasing levels of scientific and commercial exploitation, including scientific sampling, bioprospecting and mining. Overlying waters of this regionalso supports significant populations of whales and fish, including sperm whales.Eastern Mediterranean (4):The area to the south, east and west of Cyprus is important for loggerhead (Caretta caretta)and green turtles (Chelonia mydas). The areato the south, extending to the Egyptian coast, contains the Eratosthenes seamount, an isolated and near pristine mount with a likely highly endemic fauna. It also includes anarea of biologically important deepwater cold-seeps off the Nile Delta.Central Mediterranean (5):The Ligurian Sea between France, Northern Italy andSardinia is already a multi-nationally managed marine protected area, the Pelagos reservefor marine mammals. The outstanding values and importance of this area for cetaceanswas recognised in designating it as the first high seas MPA in the Mediterranean.However, the cetaceans of the Ligurian Sea need to be protected from the impacts of fishing and other activities. To the immediate south, the Tyrrhenian Sea contains a significant concentration of seamounts, and has important migration routes for bluefintuna, and is thought to be a major spawning area for the species in the Mediterranean.Sargasso Sea/Western Atlantic (6):The Sargasso Sea lies to the west of the centreof the North Atlantic Gyre and is bounded on the west by the Gulf Stream. The Sargassois a region of light winds and little rain. Coriolis forces acting on currents in the NorthAtlantic Gyre push water inward toward the centre of the gyre and planetary rotation offsets it west. The Sargasso is thus a region of convergence of currents and gentle downwelling. It supports a high level of endemism among plankton species. Convergingcurrents bring together flotsam and jetsam and higher nutrients foster growth of seaweedmats that can cover huge areas. The western Sargasso and adjacent Gulf Stream is ahotspot for aquatic megafauna, including fish, turtles and marine mammals. Young 34© Greenpeace/Davison©Greenpeace/Baigent-Mercerjuveniles of several species of turtle spend their time on the high seas in the Sargasso,feeding and sheltering among the seaweed mats. It is the breeding ground for threatenedEuropean eels (Anguilla anguilla)and is a migration route for whales, fish and turtles.Atlantic leatherback turtles migrate across the Sargasso from nesting beaches in Guyanato feeding grounds off Nova Scotia. The southern spur of this candidate reserve also includes a section of the mid-Atlanticridge that holds the Logatchev Hydrothermal Vent Area. Logatchev-1 field is characterised by three distinct sites: (i) a large sulphide mound with smoking craters; (ii)an active chimney complex called Irina-2; and (iii) an area with soft sediment and diffuseflow.  These have a diversity of biotopes including thick bacterial mats, diffuse flow areas,and two different types of smokers – ‘creeping’ or horizontal smokers, and the more common vertical structures that resemble chimneys.  Logatchev-1 also hosts an abundanceof fauna, including swarms of shrimp at black smokers, clam beds in the sedimentbiotopes, mussels from the genus Bathymodioluson sulphide chimneys and sulphide baseareas, as well as sea anemones. Logatchev-2  has six sulphide mounds and extensive massive sulphide deposits containing high concentrations of copper, gold, zinc, uranite (uranium), and the highest concentration of cobalt of any hydrothermal vent field recordedto date. The main present threat is scientific research; future threats are mining and bioprospecting.South-Central Atlantic (7):This proposed reserve includes a large section of the mid-Atlantic ridge that is rich in seamounts, as well as a ridge spur that extends from thecoast of Brazil into the Atlantic, the Trindade ridge. This ridge extends west to east at alatitude centred on 20oS, terminating at the islands of Trindade and Martin Vas. It hashigh endemism of species such as fish and is currently being damaged by deep sea trawling. The proposed reserve also includes a critical migration route for green turtles atapproximately 5oto 10oS, between breeding beaches in Ascension and feeding groundsoff South America. The candidate reserve also supports exceptional species diversity oftuna, billfish and toothed whales. The far southern part of the region includes a transitionarea between South Atlantic and Southern Ocean waters and is a critical feeding area foralbatrosses, penguins and pinnipeds that breed on remote islands of the South Atlantic.Antarctic-Patagonia (8):This proposed reserve incorporates the Antarctic Peninsula,the entire Weddell Sea and Bellingshausen Seas, much of the Scotia Sea, and parts of theSouth Atlantic. It includes the Patagonian Shelf edge, a region of exceptionally high productivity. This is the convergence zone between the south flowing warm Brazil currentand the northward-flowing cold water Malvinas-Falklands current. The proposed reserveincorporates transitional waters between the warmer southern Atlantic and cold polarseas, which also support high productivity. It is a key area for aquatic megafauna, including albatross, seals, penguins and whales. It supports eight species of baleen whalesand a further twenty species of toothed whale and dolphin. There is an important deep-seafishery for Patagonian toothfish and a highly productive shallower water fishery for squidboth of which have serious impacts on wildlife. Vema Seamount-Benguela (9):This proposed reserve includes Vema Seamountwhich lies approximately 500km off the coasts of Namibia and South Africa. It is an isolated seamount, rising from a deep abyssal plain that supports a high diversity of fishand invertebrates, probably with significant endemism. It has suffered badly from overexploitation of rock lobsters. The reserve also includes part of the Benguela currentecosystem which sustains highly productive fisheries for pelagic and bottom living species,but increasingly deepwater species like those on the seamount, are being targeted.South Africa-Agulhas Current (10):This proposed reserve incorporates the confluence between the warm, south-flowing Agulhas Current and cool, nutrient rich waters from the Southern Ocean. The mixing area includes large warm core eddiesthat propagate eastwards from the tip of South Africa, promoting high productivitythroughout the area. This productivity sustains many resident and migratory species,including southern right whales (Eubalaena glacialis), sharks, billfish, penguins and 3536© Greenpeace/Newman©Greenpeace/Davison©Greenpeace/Pullmanalbatross. The proposed reserve also includes migration routes for leatherback turtles thatnest on the South African and Mozambique coasts.Southern Ocean (11):This proposed reserve incorporates waters between approximately 45oS to the edge of Antarctica. These waters are dotted with small islandsthat are critical breeding sites for seabirds and marine mammals, including the likes ofPrince Edward, Crozet, and Kerguelen. From the map of high seas use by air-breathingmegafauna shown in this report, it is clear that the region is very important to suchspecies. Hotspots of use of the ocean by these species are concentrated around several ofthese sub-Antarctic islands. The region also has a complex of seamounts including theAfrikaner II Rise (ca. 46oS, 42oE), which straddles the edge of the South African EEZboundary. This is the site of a large amount of illegal fishing activity. It is also a favouredforaging site for many top predators, especially albatrosses, breeding both on the PrinceEdward Islands and the Crozets. The area also contains the isolated Ob and LenaTablemounts.Southern Ocean-Australia/New Zealand (12):This region of the Southern Ocean iscritical for wildlife. It includes the area between Australia, New Zealand and Antarctica,centred on Macquarie Island. This incorporates Campbell Islands, The Antipodes Islandsand Balleny Islands as well as the western half of the Ross Sea. In addition, the proposedreserve covers a large area of seamounts that are subject to bottom fishing, including theMacquarie Ridge and South Tasman Rise. Collectively the islands, several hundredseamounts and the comparatively shallow surrounding seas represent a strong physicalbarrier in oceanographic terms. The marine environment is thus one of a slow-movingwater mass rich in nutrients. The region shares similar features of high productivity andhigh concentration of air-breathing megafauna as the Southern Ocean Reserve, describedabove. It supports five species of penguin, for example, of which two are endemic, thesnares (Eudyptes robustus)and royal (Eudyptes schegel). It is also important for NewZealand sea lions (Phocarctos hookeri)and has a rich but poorly described underwaterbiota, including fragile seamount communities. The Ross Sea is distinct from the widerAntarctic marine ecosystem. Its highly productive and healthy food web includes suchcharismatic megafauna as whales, seals and penguins, but it is imminently threatened bythe rapid growth of toothfish fishing and hunting of minke whales (Balaenoptera acutorostrata). Potential threats may arise from bioprospecting, tourism and the introduction of invasive marine species from ship hulls.Central Indian Ocean-Arabian Sea (13):This region incorporates the central-western Indian Ocean. It includes the Saya de Malha Banks, a part of the MascarenePlateau between the Seychelles, Madagascar, Mauritius and Chagos. The proposed reservesupports deep and shallow water fauna, including diverse coral reefs. The area containsthe largest coral reef and seagrass habitat in the world in international waters and is astepping stone providing connectivity across the entire Indian Ocean. As such it is crucialto gene flow and migratory stocks. The area around Saya de Malha is a major whale calving ground. The proposed reserve incorporates a region of high tuna and billfish diversity as well as major seamount areas such as the Ninetyeast Ridge, Broken Ridge andthe seafloor-spreading zone of the Mid-Indian Ridge. Much of the proposed reserve is subject to high fishing intensities including trawling, longlining and purse-seining. Distantwater fleets from many nations, such as those of Europe, Sri Lanka and Asia, go there tofish. The Chagos Islands, which the reserve bounds, are uninhabited and almost unpollutedand little affected by direct human impacts except fishing. The proposed reserve surroundsthese and islands of the Maldives and Lakshadweep groups, providing an offshore conservation buffer. The western part of the reserve extends north into the Arabian Sea,encompassing a region of seasonal upwelling driven by monsoon winds.Bay of Bengal (14):This region supports a high diversity of large pelagic fishes,including tunas, billfish and whale sharks. It is an important migration route for turtlesbreeding on the coast of India’s Orissa coast and is intensively fished.37Northwestern Australia (15):This proposed reserve incorporates a region of exceptional richness of tunas and billfishes. It is a spawning area for southern bluefin tuna(Thunnus maccoyii). It is also a critical feeding and juvenile habitat for highly migratorywhale sharks.South Australia (16):This region supports very high productivity and is the meetingplace of the warm, south flowing coastal Leeuwin Current and the cool water of theSouthern Ocean. The Leeuwin spills around Cape Leeuwin into the Great Australian Bight,mixing as it does with cooler, nutrient rich water, fuelling plankton growth. This mixingzone attracts large concentrations of aquatic megafauna to feed. It is home to over fifteenspecies of toothed whale and dolphin, and eight species of baleen whale. Lord Howe Rise and Norfolk Ridge (17):This area supports extensive seamountchains of the Lord Howe Rise and Norfolk Ridge. Recent scientific studies indicate theysupport a highly endemic fauna, with a quarter to a third of species sampled foundnowhere else. Many appear to be relict species. Deepwater bottom trawlers intensivelyexploit the seamounts. This region supports a high diversity of large pelagic fishes.Coral Sea (18):This proposed reserve incorporates a region of exceptional richness oftunas, billfishes and other large pelagic animals, as well as being a global centre ofendemism for coral reef fauna. It contains significant deepwater seamount and slopehabitats, also supporting high levels of endemism.Northern New Guinea (19):This area represents an important migration corridor forcritically endangered Pacific leatherback turtles. It also incorporates the Eauripik Rise, asignificant seamount area in one of the most biologically diverse regions of the worldoceans.Western Pacific (20):This area is bounded by the Exclusive Economic Zones ofFederated States of Micronesia, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, Kiribati,Nauru and Marshall Islands. It represents an important spawning area for tunas,including Bigeye Tuna (Thunnus obesus).Kuroshi-Oyashio Confluence (21):This proposed reserve covers the area of convergence between the warm north-flowing Kuroshio Current and the cold south-flowingOyashio Current. It is a highly productive region that is rich in fish and aquatic megafauna, including whales, dolphins, tuna and albatross. These seas are a productivefishing ground for sardines, squid, bonito, and mackerel. In deep water, the proposedreserve includes sections of the Japan and Kuril Trenches.Sea of Okhotsk (22):The Sea of Okhotsk is a highly productive semi-enclosed sea thatsupports large populations of fish and shellfish, together with high concentrations ofmarine mega-fauna, including the critically endangered western population of Pacific graywhales. It is an important bird and fish migration route, especially for salmon spawning inrivers of eastern Russia. In winter, large areas of the sea are ice-bound, making for highlyseasonal productivity. Overfishing and illegal fishing are widespread, and the region isbeing rapidly developed for oil production, threatening wildlife.38© Greenpeace© Greenpeace/NobleGulf of Alaska (23):This region in the Gulf of Alaska is highly productive and is a keyarea for migrating salmon, salmon sharks, whales e.g. gray whale, (Eschrichtius robustus), fur seals (Callorhinus ursinus)and Steller’s sea lions (Eumetopias jubatus),among others. It also contains a significant concentration of seamounts.Northeastern Pacific (24):This large equatorial/sub-equatorial area extends from tothe southwest towards the North American coast. It supports high pelagic fish diversitiesand abundance and lies on a major trans-Pacific pathway for tuna migration. It also contains key migration corridors for leatherback turtles across the Pacific from NewGuinea, and from nesting beaches in California and Mexico to feeding grounds that theproposed reserve largely includes. It also is important for loggerhead turtles, blackfootedalbatross (Phoebastria nigripes)and northern elephant seals (Mirounga angustirotris). Indeep water, the region includes the Clarion-Clipperton Fracture Zone, an area with highconcentrations of manganese nodules. These nodules support a hard substrate fauna on anotherwise sediment covered abyssal plain. Without protection they are likely to be impacted by future mining operations.Southeastern Pacific (25):This proposed reserve incorporates the region bounded byGalapagos-Cocos-Panama-Costa Rica-Columbia-Ecuador. There is considerable potentialfor cooperative protection of high seas areas adjacent to the EEZs of these countries andan initiative is already underway, coordinated by Conservation International, to securesuch cooperation. The Humboldt Current bounds this region to the east before flowingaway from the Peruvian coast toward the Galapagos. Consequently this is an area of highaquatic productivity, but it is also a convergence between very different bodies of water,including North and South Equatorial Currents. The area is intensively fished but it supports a diverse and still abundant megafauna. It includes a migration route for thecritically endangered Pacific leatherback turtles from breeding beaches in Costa Rica tofeeding grounds (which the proposed reserve largely encompasses). To the southwest, theregion is a hotspot of tuna and billfish diversity. The region also contains important andvulnerable deepwater habitats, including the Galapagos Rise, Sala y Gomez Ridge andChallenger Fracture Zone.Representative areas (marked ‘R’):The global network of marine reserves presentedhere has been designed to be fully representative of high seas habitats and biodiversity.Some of the areas included are not described separately here, and are simply marked ‘R’.These areas include important representatives of particular ecosystems, such as bottomtypes, depth zones and biogeographic regions, needed to achieve targets of coverage andrepresentation of habitats.12.Implementing the networkAlthough the value of establishing a global network of marine reserves is widely recognised, there is currently no mechanism under the existing international frameworkprovided by UNCLOS and the CBD for implementing such reserves on the high seas. The CBD is the primary instrument providing direction to states for the establishment ofmarine protected areas and marine reserves under their jurisdiction, and also explicitlyacknowledges the need for protective measures in areas beyond national jurisdiction.Article 4 of the convention obliges Parties to apply the convention to all processes oractivities under their jurisdiction or control, including those taking place on the high seas.However, the Convention on Biological Diversity does not oblige states to take collectivemeasures to protect the high seas and does not contain the necessary provisions to implement its 2012 goal of a comprehensive global network.39It is Greenpeace’s view that in order to implement the CBD commitment and provide thenecessary mandate to establish and manage marine reserves on the high seas, a newimplementing agreement under UNCLOS is required. Such an implementing agreementwould not require any amendment to the text of the Convention and would be consistentwith article 22 (2) of the CBD which already obliges parties to implement the convention“with respect to the marine environment consistently with the rights and obligations ofStates under the Law of the Sea”.The agreement would provide formal recognition of theneed to protect biodiversity on the high seas, and a mandate to protect high seas areas forconservation purposes. Such an implementing agreement could be modelled on the UNFish Stocks Agreement – which was itself negotiated in order to implement some of theArticles of UNCLOS, and could be used to address a number of gaps in the current governance of high seas biodiversity in addition to those relating to the establishment ofhigh seas marine reserves.Other advantages of developing such an implementing agreement under UNCLOS include:•UNCLOS is regarded as the framework agreement that delimits ocean areas anddetails state rights and duties in the high seas and the ‘Area’,and it is recognisedas customary international law;•UNCLOS’broad remit already covers most or all of the activities that impact on marine biodiversity,including emerging issues such as bioprospecting and noise pollution;•UNCLOS provides a binding dispute settlement mechanismSuch an agreement would build on and provide for the implementation of existing provisions in UNCLOS relating to the protection and preservation of the marine environment and the ‘Area’.  40© Innerspace Visions13.Literature citedAirame, S., J.E. Dugan, K.D. Lafferty, H. Leslie, D.A. McArdle and R.R. Warner. (2003)Applying ecological criteria to marine reserve design: a case study from the CaliforniaChannel Islands. Ecological Applications 13 (Supplement): S215-S228.Balmford A, Gravestock P, Hockley N, C. McClean and C. Roberts. 2004. The Worldwidecosts of marine protected areas. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 101: 9694-9697.Beebe, W. (1926) The Arcturus Adventure. The Knickerbocker Press, New York.Baum, J.K. and R.A. Myers (2004). Shifting baselines and the decline of pelagic sharks inthe Gulf of Mexico. Ecology Letters7:135-145.BirdLife International (2004) Tracking ocean wanderers. The global distribution of albatrosses and petrels. BirdLife International, Cambridge, UK.Devine, J.A., K.D. Baker, and R.L. Haedrich (2006) Deep-sea fishes qualify as endangered. Nature 439: 29.Gage, J. D. and P.A. Tyler. (1991). Deep-sea Biology. A Natural History of Organisms atthe Deep-sea Floor. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.Gell F.R. and C.M. Roberts (2003). Benefits beyond boundaries: the fishery effects ofmarine reserves. Trends in Ecology and Evolution18: 448-455Gjerde, K.M., ed. (2003). Ten-year strategy to promote the development of a global representative system of high seas marine protected area networks, as agreed by MarineTheme Participants at the 5th World Parks Congress Governance Session ProtectingMarine Biodiversity beyond National Jurisdiction,”Durban, South Africa (8-17September 2003). IUCN, WCPA WWF. Available atwww.iucn.org/themes/marine/pdf/10ystrat.pdfGrey, Z. (1919). Tales of Fishes. Grosset & Dunlap, New York.MCBI (2004). Scientists’ Statement on Protecting the World’s Deep-Sea Coral andSponge Ecosystems.http://www.mcbi.org/DSC_statement/sign.htm Marine ConservationBiology Institute, Redmond, Washington (USA)Merrett, N.R. and R.L. Haedrich (1997). Deep-sea Demersal Fish and Fisheries.Chapman& Hall, London (UK)MPA News (2005) Global targets for MPA designations will not be met; experts respond.MPA News 7(5): 1-2.Myers, R.A. and B.Worm (2003). Rapid worldwide depletion of predatory fish communities. Nature423: 280-283Norse, E.A., L.B. Crowder, K. Gjerde, D. Hyrenbach, C.M. Roberts, C. Safina and M.E.Soule. (2005) Place-based ecosystem management in the open ocean. Pages 302-327 inE. Norse & L. Crowder, eds. Marine Conservation Biology: The Science of Maintainingthe Sea’s Biodiversity. Island Press, Washington DC, USA.Pauly, D., V. Christensen, R. Froese, A. Longhurst, T. Platt, S. Sathyendranath, K.Sherman and R. Watson. 2000. Mapping fisheries onto marine ecosystems: a proposal fora consensus approach for regional, oceanic and global integration. Pp 13-22. In: Pauly, D.and T.J. Pitcher (eds). Methods for Evaluating the Impacts of North Atlantic Ecosystems.Fisheries Centre Research Reports 8(2).41Richer de Forges, B., J.A. Koslow and G.C.B. Poore (2000). Diversity and endemism ofthe benthic seamount fauna in the southwest Pacific. Nature405: 944-947Roberts, C.M. (2002). Deep impact: the rising toll of fishing in the deep sea. Trends inEcology and Evolution17: 242-245Roberts, C.M. and J.P. Hawkins. (2000) Fully Protected Marine Reserves: A Guide.Endangered Seas Campaign, WWF-US, Washington DC, and University of York, UK.131pp. Translated into Spanish and French. All language versions are available to download from: http://assets.panda.org/downloads/marinereservescolor.pdf.Roberts, C. M., S. Andelman, G. Branch, R. Bustamante, J.C. Castilla, J. Dugan, B.Halpern, K. Lafferty, H. Leslie, J. Lubchenco, D. McArdle, H. Possingham, M.Ruckelshaus, and R. Warner. (2003a) Ecological criteria for evaluating candidate sites formarine reserves. Ecological Applications 13 (Supplement): S199-S214.Roberts, C.M., G. Branch, R. Bustamante, J.C. Castilla, J.  Dugan, B.  Halpern, K.Lafferty, H. Leslie, J.  Lubchenco, D. McArdle, M. Ruckelshaus, and R.  Warner. (2003b)Application of ecological criteria in selecting marine reserves and developing reserve networks.  Ecological Applications 13 (Supplement): S215-S228.Roberts, C.M., J.D. Reynolds, I.M. Côté, J.P. Hawkins. (2006). Redesigning coral reefconservation. In: I.M. Cote and J.D. Reynolds (ed). Coral Reef Conservation.Pages 515-537. Cambridge University Press.World Parks Congress Recommendation 22. (2003). Building a global system of marineand coastal protected area networks. http://www.iucn.org/themes/wcpa/wpc2003/pdfs/outputs/recommendations/approved/english/html/r22.htmWorld Parks Congress Recommendation 23. (2003). Protecting marine biodiversity andecosystem processes through marine protected areas beyond national jurisdiction.http://www.iucn.org/themes/wcpa/wpc2003/pdfs/outputs/recommendations/approved/english/html/r23.htmWorm, B., Lotze, H.K., Myers, R.A., Sandow, M. and Oschlies, A. (2005). Global patternsof predator diversity in the open oceans. 309: 1365-1369.42© Greenpeace/Newman14.AcknowledgementsThis report could not have been produced without the generous support of many people.Foremost among them, we thank Boris Worm for sharing his excellent tuna and billfishdata and several important oceanographic data layers with us. Kristina Gjerde wasextremely helpful in supplying key documents to us before they became generally available. Elliott Norse has provided endless inspiration for the task of high seas conservation. We are also grateful to the many people who replied to our questionnaire atshort notice, suggesting places that deserve to be protected on the high seas. We owe thema large debt of gratitude. Their names are listed in Appendix 2.Appendix 1:Data layers usedBathymetryGlobal sea depths were obtained from the GEBCO One Minute Grid (The GEBCO DigitalAtlas published by the British Oceanographic Data Centre on behalf of IntergovernmentalOceanographic Commission and International Hydrographic Organization, 2003), whichprovide the data on a one-minute interval global grid. For use with Marxanthe depth values were reclassified into five categories: 0-200m Epipelagic201-1000m Mesopelagic1001-4000mBathypelagic4001-6000m Abyssopelagic6001m+ HadalpelagicBottom complexityHigh species diversity is often associated with high habitat complexity. More complexhabitats provide greater refugia, which can support a greater variety of life stages andalso interrupt predator-prey relationships, so allowing more species to co-exist. All of theabove can lead to greater ecosystem resilience.  To identify features associated with varying and complex habitats such as sills, ledges and rocky reefs, Ardron (2002) developed a method of calculating bottom complexity. The measure gauges how convolutedthe seabed is from how often the slope of the sea bottom changes in a given area (Ardron2002). It is estimated by exaggerating the depth scale and calculating the density ofchanges in the ‘slope of the slope’ of the (exaggerated) depth. We followed this method,but due to the large grid size used and the global coverage (which meant a broad range ofvalues) it was not necessary to exaggerate the depth in order to cause a greater spread ofvalues. We then classified the results into four equal categories of high to low bottomcomplexity. Global sea depths were obtained from the GEBCO One Minute Grid (GEBCO2003), which provide bathymetric data on a one-minute interval global grid.  Figure 3: Map of seabed bottom complexity.43Ardron, J.A., 2002. A Recipe for Determining Benthic Complexity: An Indicator ofSpecies Richness. Chapter 23, Marine Geography: GIS for the Oceans and Seas. Edited byJoe Breman, ESRI Press, Redlands, CA, USA. Pp 169-175SeamountsA global point database of more than 14,000 seamount locations was obtained from TheSea Around Us Project (www.seaaroundus.org). The seamounts were identified from depthdifferences on a digital elevation map (Kitchingman and Lai 2004). The locations weremapped, overlaid with a five-degree grid, and the number of seamounts per grid cell calculated. Figure 4: Density of seamounts (number per grid cell).Kitchingman, A., and Lai, S., (2004) Inferences on potential seamount locations frommid-resolution bathymetric data. Pp 7-12 In: Pauly, D., and Morato, T. (eds). Seamounts:Biodiversity and Fisheries, 2004 Fisheries Centre Research Reports 12(5).Upwellings and DownwellingsWe created a data layer showing ocean areas where deep and bottom waters form andsink, zones where intermediate waters form and sink, and major upwelling zones. We created a GIS polygon layer of these zones that could be used within Marxan as featuresfor selection.  Source: Segar, D. A., 1998.  Introduction to Ocean Science. Wadsworth Publishing Co.,Belmont, CA.Sea surface temperature gradientThe steepness of the gradient in sea surface temperature from one place to another provides an indication of places where warm and cold water meet, including upwellingsand convergence zones between warm and cold currents. These data are markers of highproductivity and the presence of higher concentrations of marine life (Worm et al. 2005).Sea surface temperature (SST) gradient data were kindly provided by Boris Worm (Wormet. al. 2005).  Five-day maps of sea surface temperature at a resolution of 0.5owere provided by the NOAA/NASA Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer, OceansPathfinder Project from 1998-2002.  The maximum slope of each data point (at originalresolution of 0.5o) to its eight surrounding points was calculated and then averaged across5ox 5ogrid cells, to give an estimate of the spatial gradients in SST (oC.km-1).4445© Greenpeace/Behring©Greenpeace©NOAAFigure 5: Map showing the intensity of the sea surface temperature gradientWorm, B., Sandow, M., Oschlies, A., Lotze, H.K. and Myers, R.A., 2005. Global Patternsof Predator Diversity in the Opens Oceans. Science309: 1365-1369.Tuna and Billfish dataTuna and billfish diversity data were kindly provided by Boris Worm (Worm et. al.2005).Global 5ox 5ogridded Japanese longlining data from 1990-99 were used to estimate twomeasures of species diversity in each grid cell: species richness (the number of species per50 individuals caught) and species density (the number of species caught per 1000 hooks). Figure 6: Map showing the species richness of tunas and billfish (number of species perfifty fish caught).Worm, B., Sandow, M., Oschlies, A., Lotze, H.K. and Myers, R.A., 2005. Global Patternsof Predator Diversity in the Opens Oceans. Science309: 1365-1369.46Bottom sedimentsThe distribution of sea-floor sediments was taken fromhttp://soconnell.web.wesleyan.edu/courses/ees106/lecture_notes/lecture14_106ocean_cir2/sld034.htm.  The original source of the image is: Segar, D. A., 1998.  Introduction toOcean Science.  Wadsworth Publishing Co., Belmont, CA. The image was then digitised tocreate a GIS polygon layer.CetaceansMaps of the geographic distribution of 73 cetacean species were obtained fromhttp://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cetaceans. They represent the majority of the world’scetaceans, but we excluded river dolphins.  Maps were digitised into polygon coverageswhich were compiled into distribution maps of three groups: baleen whales (Mysticetes),toothed whales (Odontocetes) excluding dolphins (Delphinidae), which are the largest family within the Odontocetes and were mapped separately.  A 5ox 5ogrid was then overlaid and the number of species present per grid cell calculated for each group and collectively.47Figure 7: Species diversity of cetaceans.Biogeographic zonesA map of the world oceans biogeochemical provinces (Pauly et al. 2000, downloaded fromhttp://seaaroundus.org/report/method/pauly02.pdf) was used to create a GIS layer of theworld’s 12 ocean biomes that are to be used as a selection feature representing biogeographic zones in Marxan.Figure 8: Biogeographic zones of the global oceans.Pauly, D., V. Christensen, R. Froese, A. Longhurst, T. Platt, S. Sathyendranath, K.Sherman and R. Watson. 2000. Mapping fisheries onto marine ecosystems: a proposal fora consensus approach for regional, oceanic and global integration. Pp 13-22. In: Pauly, D.and T.J. Pitcher (eds). Methods for Evaluating the Impacts of North Atlantic Ecosystems.Fisheries Centre Research Reports 8(2).48Longline and purse-seining catchesFishing operations represent a threat to biodiversity of both target and non-target specieson the high seas. Average recent yearly catches of tuna and billfish (tonnes) were obtainedon a 5ox 5ogrid basis.  We used data averaged from 2000 to 2003 inclusive, separatedby gear type, i.e. longlining and purse-seining. Figure 9:  Distribution of longline and purse-seine catches.ReferenceFisheries Global Information System (FIGIS).  Atlas of Tuna and Billfish Catches.http://www.fao.org/figis/servlet/static?dom=root&xml=index.xml.Distribution of aquatic megafaunaAn extensive data search on the abundance, at-sea distribution and foraging ranges ofpenguins, turtles, pinnipeds and albatross was carried out.  The data were digitised intoseparate GIS layers for each species. To identify areas on the high seas that were  important to marine megafauna, we divided the high seas into five-degree grid-cells. Cellsthat fell entirely within the exclusive economic zones were excluded, however cells aroundsmall islands such as the sub-Antarctic islands were included on the basis of being soremote they were essentially high seas in all but name.Cells were scored from 0-3 on a species-by-species basis, depending on the use:ScoreDefinition0No individuals present1Little use2Intermediate use3High use and/or a breeding colony presentThese scores were then summed across the species within the taxonomic groups to producea composite score for each grid-cell for each of the four taxa. To ascertain an overallimportance for each taxon, the scores were standardized onto a common scale of zero toone, to give them equal weighting. The scores were then summed to produce a combinedscore for all taxa. The score for each grid-cell was divided by the number of taxa presentso as not to over-represent cells where data were available for multiple taxa.  We were unable to obtain data on all species or regions because of the incomplete 49coverage of scientific research to date. Consequently, where data indicate high importanceof an ocean area to one or more of the taxa, it is taken as a positive indication that protection of that area would be worthwhile. However, absence of data from an area is notused as an indication that the cell does not warrant protection. Its value to aquaticmegafauna is simply indeterminate. Data on albatrosses are the most complete due to theexistence of a detailed review of at-sea movements that includes data for 16 of the 21existing species (BirdLife International 2004).Figure 10: Distribution of at-sea movements of air-breathing aquatic megafauna (albatrosses, turtles, pinnipeds and penguins).50© Greenpeace/GraceAppendix 2:Respondents to the expert consultation on high seas marine reserves.Rob Ahrens, University of British Columbia, Canada;Jeff Ardron, German Federal Agency for Nature Conservation;Peter Batson, Deep Ocean Expeditions;Giovanni Bearzi, Tethys Research Institute, Italy;Maria Beger, University of Queensland, Australia;Doug Biffard, British Columbia Parks, Canada;Barbara Block, Stanford University, USA; P. Dee Boersma, University of Washington, USA;George Branch, University of Cape Town, South Africa;Chris Caldow, NOAA, USAClaudio Campagna, National Research Council of ArgentinaJim Carlton, Williams College, USA;Nick Conner, Environment Department, New South Wales Government, Australia;Helen Cross, University of East Anglia, UK; Paul Dayton, University of California, San Diego, USA;Lyndon Devantier, Australia;Nick Dulvy, Centre for Fisheries and Aquaculture Science, UK; Carlos Eduardo Leite Ferreira, Dept of Oceanography, Arraial do Cabo, RJ, BrazilKate Eschelbach, NOAA, USAMarta Estrada, Departamente de Biología Marina, Institut de Ciències del Mar, Spain;Sergio Floeter, University of California, Santa Barbara, USA;Rod Fujita, Environmental Defense, USA;Caleb Gardner, University of Tasmania, Australia;Fiona Gell, Isle of Man Government, UK;Stuart Green, Reefcheck, Philippines;Ben Halpern, University of California, Santa Barbara, USA;Indu Hewawasam, World Bank, USA;Cheryl Hislop, University of Tasmania, Australia;Sascha Hooker, St. Andrews University, UK;Mike Kaiser, University of Wales at Bangor, UK;Les Kaufman, Boston University, USA;Graeme Kelleher, Australia;Stephen Kellert, Yale University, USA;Nicola King, University of Aberdeen, UK;Stuart Kininmouth, Australian Institute of Marine Science;Heather Leslie, Princeton University, USA;Helene Marsh, James Cook University, Australia;Aileen Maypa, PhilippinesLaurence McCook, Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority, Australia;Paul McNab, Department of Fisheries and Oceans, Canada;Camilo Mora, University of Windsor, Canada;Ivan Nagelkerken, Radboud University, The Netherlands;Deon Nel, WWF, South AfricaGiuseppe Notarbartolo di Sciara, Tethys Research Institute, Italy;John Ogden, Florida Institute of Oceanography, USA;Bob Paine, University of Washington, USA;Steve Palumbi, Stanford University, USA;Dominique Pelletier, IFREMER, France;Simon Pittman, NOAA, USAAndrew Price, University of Warwick, UK;Murray Roberts, Scottish Association for Marine Science, UK;Rod Salm, The Nature Conservancy, USA;Dominique von Schiller, University of East Anglia, UK; Stephen Schneider, Stanford University, USA;51Charles Sheppard, University of Warwick, UK;Chris Smyth, Australian Conservation Foundation;Jason Spencer-Hall, Plymouth University, UK;Daniel Suman, Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Sciences, USA;John Terborgh, Duke University, USA;Virginie Tilot, France;Carl Walters, University of British Columbia, Canada;Dianne Williams, University of Western Australia;David Williamson, James Cook University, Australia;Alan White, Tetra Tech, Honolulu, USA;Dirk Zeller, University of British Columbia, Canada;52© Greenpeace/Grace53© Greenpeace/Davison©Greenpeace/Visser©NOAAAppendix 3:Results of the expert consultationArea recommended for protectionJustificationGulf of Maine shelf edge/central AtlanticConvergence zone between warm Gulf Stream and cold Labrador current;summer feeding site for highly migratory species, including whales, tuna, billfish and leatherback turtles.Northwest Atlantic - Grand BanksThe ‘tail of the bank’ outside Canada’s EEZ. Important nursery area for cod and other shallow water fish; high intensity international fishery.Northwest Atlantic - Flemish Cap A shallow water shelf covering a total area of 58,000 km2situated (47˚N, 45˚W)outside the Canadian EEZ; supports the most heterogeneous offshore Atlantic cod population; foraging ground for north eastern and western Atlantic bluefin tuna populations; leatherback turtle summer foraging area; visited by sperm whale; may be an important wintering area for Great Shearwaters. The area is intensively trawled.Eastern Canada - the Gully submarine On the Scotian Shelf off eastern Canada, this large submarine canyon canyon (approx 43.5o- 44.5oN,supports an unusually high abundance and diversity of cetacean species.  58.5o- 59.5oW)This region appears to be particularly important for deep-diving species, possibly due to high squid biomass in the area.Sargasso Sea, Western Central AtlanticDownwelling region in the centre of the North Atlantic Gyre; large floating mats of seaweed; critical habitat for juvenile turtles, eels and other migratory species; especially rich for tuna and billfish species; high planktonic endemism; important for birds and cetaceans.3 nominationsMid-Atlantic ridge between 49oand 53oN This section of the mid-Atlantic ridge contains the Charlie Gibbs FractureZone and is rich in seamounts. High levels of illegal as well as legal deepsea fishing using trawls and gill nets causing depletion of target species and serious habitat damage. The area also holds the sub-polar front which is highly productive and supports prolific pelagic life, including large bodied species such as whales.2 nominationsRockall, Hatton and Porcupine Banks, Support highly diverse deepwater coral reefs and fish fauna; currently Northeast Atlantic – subject to intensive trawling pressure; location is ideally suited for enforcement.3 nominationsMid-Atlantic Ridge Rainbow Hydrothermal Comprises more than 30 groups of active small sulphide chimneys over Vent field - located in international waters an area of 15 square kilometres. About 32 different species so far at 2270-2320 m depth on the Azorean recorded in the Rainbow area; small spatial extent and site-specific segment of the Mid-Atlantic-Ridge –communities make the vent field highly vulnerable to the increasing levelsof scientific and commercial exploitation, including sampling, bioprospecting and mining.2 nominationsMid-Atlantic Ridge Logatchev Hydrothermal The Logatchev-1 field is characterised by three distinct sites: (i) a large Vent Area –Logatchev-1 field is located at sulphide mound with smoking craters; (ii) an active chimney complex 14°45'N 44°58'Wcalled Irina-2; and (iii) an area with soft sediment and diffuse flow.  Logatchev-2 is located at 14°43.22'NThese areas are further characterised by a diversity of biotopes including 44°56.27'Wthick bacterial mats, diffuse flow areas, and two different types of smokers – ‘creeping’ or horizontal smokers, and the more common Covers approximately 200,000 m2vertical structures that resemble chimneys.  Logatchev-1 also hosts an at a depth of 3050 m.abundance of fauna, including swarms of shrimp at black smokers, clam Most isolated in mid-Atlantic.beds in the sediment biotopes, mussels from the genus Bathymodiolus on sulphide chimneys and sulphide base areas, as well as sea anemones. - there were 2 other more generalLogatchev-2  is characterised by six sulphide mounds and extensive nominations for hydrothermal ventsmassive sulphide deposits containing high concentrations of copper, gold, zinc, uranite (uranium), and the highest concentration of cobalt of any hydrothermal vent field recorded to date. Main current threat is scientificresearch; future threats are mining and bioprospecting.54Eastern Atlantic - Josephine Bank Current swept seamount, rising from 3200 m depth to within 170 m of t(36˚45’N, 14˚15’W)he surface. This seamount is situated in international waters between the EEZ of continental Portugal and Madeira; and is located on an abyssal plain. Supports a diverse assemblage of fish, corals and other invertebrates; possible stepping stone in tuna and turtle migrations. Seriously threatened by deep water trawling.Atol das Rocas/Fernando de Noronha Ridge, Submarine mountain ridges extending east-west from the coast of Brazil;Brazilrich in deep sea endemic species and sensitive to damage from bottom trawling.Vitoria-Trindade Spur, BrazilVery important for deepwater endemic species; strong fishing pressure from the Asian fleet (e.g. Korea, Japan). The chain has shallow peaks that are currently subjected to trawling and very deep parts as well.Patagonian Shelf Edge –Convergence zone between the cold Falklands-Malvinas Current and warm Brazil Current; exceptionally high pelagic productivity attracts andsupports large concentrations of aquatic megafauna; an internationally critical area for endangered whales, seals and sea lions; high intensity shallow and deep sea fisheries operate for toothfish and squid.3 nominationsVema Sea Mount - 500km off NamibiaHigh diversity, high vulnerability deep seamount; has suffered badly from overexploitation of rock lobsters.Afrikaner II Rise (ca. 46oS, 42oE) in This deep rise straddles the edge of the South African EEZ boundary, the Southern Ocean.and is the site of a large amount of illegal fishing activity. It is a favoured foraging site for many top predators, especially albatrosses, breeding both on the Prince Edward Islands and the Crozets.Mediterranean: The National Park of the Sparsely populated with limited human impacts; has a rich biodiversity ofNorth Dodecanese, currently in the processmarine and terrestrial ecosystems, supporting numerous protected and of being established, is situated in Greece,endangered species: marine mammals and turtles including in the southeastern Aegean, includingMediterranean monk seals, bottlenose, striped, common and Risso’s 44 islands and islets (the island groupsdolphins and loggerhead turtles; extensive Posidonia seagrass beds and of Agathonisi, Arki and Lipsi, as welldiverse littoral ecosystems; the islands support numerous important as isolated islets further south)breeding birds and are critical way stations for migratory species.Ligurian Sea, Mediterranean Contains a permanent frontal system that promotes higher productivity; important region for marine mammals; currently declared a protected area between France and Italy – the Pelagos Sanctuary – but little real protection as yet.2 nominationsEastern Mediterranean – area of cold The area harbours an exceptionally high concentration of cold seeps off the Nile Delta. Location of thehydrocarbon seeps between 300 and 800 off the continental slope of core area is: 31°30’-31º50’N,North Sinai (Egypt) and the Palestinian Authority Gaza strip; supports 33°10’-34º00’ E.unique living communities of chemosynthetic organisms such as polychaetes and bivalves.Eastern Mediterranean - Eratosthenes The flat-topped seamount measures approximately 120 km in diameter atSeamount is located between the the base, and rises 1500 m above the adjacent bathyal plain, with a Levantine Platform to the south and thesummit 756 m deep. Studies reveal a rich and diverse ecosystem of Cyprus margin to the north, ca.100 kmcorals and other invertebrates. Possibly an isolated refuge for relict south of Cyprus (33°-34°N, 32°-33°E)populations of species that have disappeared from the adjacent continental slope. No fishing activity is reported in the area; probably themost pristine environment in the Mediterranean.Mascarene Plateau, South West Indian Supports deep and shallow water fauna, including coral reefs; high Ocean fishing intensities including trawling.2 nominationsSaya de Malha Banks (part of the The are contains the largest coral reef and seagrass habitat in the world Mascarene Plateau), between in international waters; stepping stone linking connectivity between Seychelles, Madagascar, Mauritiuswhole-ocean shallow water communities and fisheries; crucial to gene and Chagosflow and migratory straddling stocks across the entire Indian Ocean; major whale calving grounds.55Indian Ocean – Chagos, Lakshadweep,Chagos is almost totally unpolluted and unaffected by direct human Maldives - a single but large ribbon impacts except fishing and hence is perhaps one of the world’s few protected area encircling the entire arearemaining ‘pristine’ environments. The reserve would surround and provide an offshore conservation buffer for the three island groups, whosecoral reefs in particular are of exceptional biodiversity and international significance.Northwest Pacific/Japan: Oyashio-Area of convergence between the warm Kuroshio Current and the cold Kuroshio confluenceOyashio Current; highly productive region rich in fish and aquatic megafauna, including whales, dolphins, tuna and albatross; productive fishing ground for sardines, squid, bonito, and mackerel.Southwestern Pacific – box 32oS to This area contains deep-sea mounts and is a known and well-targeted 24oS and 172oto 180oEast. The areacommercial fishing ground for the high seas fishing fleets mainly focusingis bordered by theEEZs of Norfolk Island,on pelagic species. The area also has significant concentrations of deep Fiji, Tonga Australia and New Zealand.sea coral habitats. It is threatened by deep-water bottom trawling, tuna fishing and potentially sea bed mining operations.Norfolk Ridge seamounts, southwest PacificHighly endemic deep seamount fauna; many relict species; vulnerable to deepwater trawling.Equatorial western central Pacific Convergence zone between northern and southern equatorial currents; convergence zone between 10onorth and high plankton productivity attracts large concentrations of migratory south of equator megafauna.3 nominationsSouth China Sea/Spratly Islands Large area of shallow water coral reefs rich in species; probably acts as a regional source of replenishment for depleted populations; disputed between several countries; proposed as international marine protected area.6 nominationsLord Howe Rise, between Australia and Highly endemic deep seamount fauna; vulnerable to deepwater trawling.New Zealand - 2 nominationsEastern Pacific - box 10oN-25oN and This large sub-equatorial area lies to the south west of the Hawaii EEZ 170oW-150oWand has high predator diversities and abundance.Clarion-Clipperton Fracture Zone, Area with high concentrations of manganese nodules; nodules support Eastern central Pacific hard substrate fauna on sediment covered abyssal plain; likely to be impacted by future mining operations.2 nominationsEastern Pacific off MexicoTwo migration corridors for Leatherback turtles between nesting beaches and feeding areas in the south eastern Pacific.2 nominationsEastern Tropical Pacific (Panama Bight) Under cold and warm current influences; includes highly productive bight region – enclosed by Costa Rica,waters where the Humboldt Current flows east from South American Panama, Colombia, and Ecuador to thecoast; highly productive waters support extraordinary concentrations of east and to the west by Galapagosmarine life, including endangered aquatic megafauna such as and Cocos Islands.Leatherback Turtles. Intensively fished using longlines and purse-seines.2 nominationsEastern Pacific - Explorer seamount Includes several seamounts and ridges straddling Canada's Pacific EEZ region to the west of British Columbiaand international waters; supports high diversity of deep sea fish and invertebrates; threatened by bottom trawling.Eastern Pacific - box within 5oS-33oS This large sub-equatorial area is adjacent to the EEZs of Chile and Peru and 145oW-90oWand the Humboldt current system and has high predator diversities and abundance.South Pacific from 0oto 40oSouth, Critical habitat for a wide variety of whale species; proposed as the between 120oEast and 130oW.South Pacific Whale Sanctuary: http://www.doc.govt.nz/Whats-New/Issues/Archive/A-South-Pacific-Whale-Sanctuary-(Agenda-Paper).pdf Southern Ocean Polar Front in South Transition zone between warm and cold water masses. Critical feeding Atlantic and Indian Oceansand migration routes for albatrosses and other aquatic megafauna.56Balleny Islands, Southern Ocean; Nesting area for Adelie, Chinstrap and Macaroni penguins; important forzone of approximately 150 nauticalmarine megafauna including whales and seals.miles around the islands.New Zealand Sub-Antarctic Islands: Collectively the islands, the 800 seamounts and the comparatively Campbell and Bounty Plateausshallow surrounding seas represent a strong physical barrier in combined; the Auckland Islands/Motu Maha,oceanographic terms. The marine environment is thus one of a Campbell Island/Motu Ihupuku,slow-moving water mass rich in nutrients. Important for New Zealand the Antipodes and the Bounty IslandsSea Lions, several species of endemic seabird. The area has a rich but poorly described underwater biota, including fragile seamount communities.Southern Ocean to the south of Tasmania The northern border of the protected area should meet the Australian encompassing the Tasman Basin and SouthEEZ (South of Tasmania), the eastern border should meet the New Tasman RiseZealand EEZ, to the West of the Auckland Islands and Macquarie Ridge.The area is rich in seamounts with a high diversity of the deep sea fauna is well documented.  The area is fished by bottom trawlers from several countries including Australia and New Zealand.Antarctic and Polar Seas Highly productive; habitat for many threatened birds, mammals and deep-sea fish. Require large scale protection.7nominationsAntarctica - Ross Sea continental shelf Distinct from the wider Antarctic marine ecosystem; highly productive ecosystem; south of the Antarcticand healthy food web includes such charismatic megafauna as whales, Divergence or East Wind Drift.seals and penguins; imminent threat to this last remaining sanctuary in It lies west of 155oW in watersthe rapid growth of the extraction of toothfish and minke whales; shallower than 3000 mpotential threats may arise from bioprospecting, tourism and the introduction of invasive marine species from ship hulls.57© Greenpeace/Novis58