# Sea of Distress 2017: The Foodservice Industry, Ocean Health, and Seafood Workers

Report ranks foodservice companies on their efforts to protect our oceans and
seafood workers
Greenpeace’s Sea of Distress 2017 report evaluates and ranks 15 major U.S.
foodservice companies on their commitments to sustainable seafood. How does
your foodservice provider score?

[**Click here to download**** _Sea of Distress
2017_**](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/foodservicereport2017), Greenpeace’s
second assessment of foodservice companies that feed millions of people every
day who dine outside the home.

Unfamiliar to many, companies like **Sysco** , **US Foods** , **Performance
Food Group** , **Compass Group** , **Aramark** , and **Sodexo** work to feed
people in K-12 to university cafeterias, corporate dining halls, restaurants,
sports arenas, amusement parks, hospitals, and home. These companies provide
food and services for many clients from Google to Disney World, Burger King,
Kennedy Space Center, Yosemite National Park, Florida State University, Hilton
Hotels, and the Super Bowl.

This report identifies which major foodservice companies are leaders in
responsible seafood and which are failing. While there are some improvements
underway, several foodservice companies are still failing to provide
responsible seafood.

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/09b75129-scorecard_short_600-1.png)

**Sodexo** , **Aramark** , and **Compass Group** ranked highest yet again
because of their focus on sustainable seafood, increasing their lead over the
worst performers **Maines Paper & Food Service**, **Shamrock Foods** , and
**Elior North America**. Each of the remaining nine profiled companies failed,
including **Sysco** , **US Foods** , **Gordon Food Service** and **Reinhart
Foodservice**. **Performance Food Group** overtook its competitor **Sysco**
for fourth place and is close to receiving a passing score, while
**Centerplate** and **Delaware North** are slowly improving as they devote
more resources to responsible seafood.

Applauding industry leaders and exposing those lagging behind is key to
getting foodservice companies to take responsibility to help protect our
oceans and the people who depend on them.

Is the company providing food at your school, workplace, or favorite
restaurant selling sustainable seafood? Learn more in **[_Sea of Distress
2017_.](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/foodservicereport2017)**

The 2016 edition of _Sea of Distress_ is [available
here](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/foodservicereport).

