# Too Fast For Gas: Problems at Venture Global’s Calcasieu Pass Should Not Be Overlooked

Venture Global touts holding the global record for the “fastest large-scale
greenfield LNG facility to ever be built,” but at what cost to performance and
safety?

![Venture Global in Cameron,
Louisiana](https://storage.googleapis.com/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/791106fb-gp0stw1e9_web_size_with_credit_line.jpg)Flaring
from the Venture Global Calcasieu Facility is visible for miles in the night
sky.

**Last month, Venture Global told regulators and customers that issues with
the Calcasieu Pass LNG facility will delay the start of commercial
operations.**

They described the issues as “failures in the five horizontal heat recovery
steam generator (HRSGs) units that facilitate combined-cycle power generation”
and, more specifically, “leaks in the welds between the upper carbon steel
header and finned tubes of the HRSG units” that will “require extensive
repairs and replacements.” _1_ These failures affect the on-site power plant—a
seemingly basic module that provides energy for gas liquefaction. The
announcement is another troubling sign for Calcasieu Pass, where massive
methane gas releases and high rates of flaring have already raised concerns
since pre-commercial operations started last year.

### One Set of Important Tests Was Carried Out In Under a Day

In 2020, Venture Global and Baker Hughes, the equipment supplier, certified a
full set of equipment for Calcasieu Pass LNG with just a short “virtual”
test._2_ According to Baker Hughes, the testing process is typically much more
exhaustive:

_“String tests are often time-consuming and can take from just one day up to
several days or weeks to complete. Typical test days involve the face-to-face
participation of various customer representatives, inspectors, engineering and
project management teams—which often results in well over 30 people present on
the test site to verify the equipment performance.” 3_

**But in this case (and for the first time ever), the test was conducted in
less than eight hours with many, if not all, of the testing experts and
project executives participating remotely.**

Due to an unwillingness to absorb COVID-related delays, nobody from either
company traveled specifically for the test. Instead, they engaged virtually
while on-site technicians wearing “Smart Helmets” transmitted information back
live. The maneuver could also have reduced costs for Venture Global, whose CEO
has long promised to “​​lower costs wherever possible to offer our customers
the lowest priced LNG.” _4_

**Once testing concluded, Venture Global certified the equipment almost
immediately.** According to Baker Hughes, “we quickly answered the few
technical questions that Venture Global had” and “they signed the _String Test
Acceptance Certificate_ the same day, which is rare.” _5_ Venture Global’s
Chief Operating Officer, Brian Cothran, was previously the Vice President of
Global Sales for Baker Hughes.

In a document explaining the virtual string test, Baker Hughes suggests that
the entire system was certified through the process described above:

_“To support Venture Global’s commitment to provide a low capital cost, low
operating cost, and fast-to-market LNG production, Baker Hughes is supplying
highly efficient and reliable modularized compression liquefaction trains as
well as power generation and electrical distribution equipment …

A string test is a major project milestone performed on the first full set of
equipment. Replicating and simulating site operation conditions for the
complete system, it is the only way to prove that all the major components
function together as they should. **Every component that will be shipped to
and operated at the final project site is commissioned and validated…** 6_

The string test being described was conducted in Italy before the equipment
was shipped and installed at the project site in Louisiana. Although we do not
know if further tests were conducted later, these reports could raise serious
questions about Venture Global’s fast build-out and Baker Hughes’ “virtual
string test.”

### Not the First Sign of Trouble at Calcasieu Pass

The Louisiana Bucket Brigade, an environmental group, has also observed a
pattern of high flaring and suspected under-reporting of accidents since the
facility began operating in January 2022._7_ During one stretch of time,
flaring occurred for 84 out of 90 days._8_ Some of the flaring occurred at
night and during peak neo-tropical bird migration season, even though the
facility’s environmental impact statement (EIS) had a commitment to “avoid
flaring at night, during low visibility conditions, and during peak migration
seasons.” _9_

Satellite estimates confirm that Calcasieu Pass has been the location of high
flaring volumes._10_ According to Global Gas Flaring Tracker data, the
location flared about 589 million cubic feet in 2022 (1.85 cubic feet per
million cubic feet of gas exported), the second highest amount on an absolute
basis and the highest amount on a per-output basis out of six US LNG
facilities with data._11_ For comparison, the nearby Cameron LNG facility
flared less than a third as much on a per-output basis.

Raising additional concerns, Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality
(LDEQ) reports show that Calcasieu Pass released approximately 290,000 pounds
of gas from tanks in permitted and unpermitted releases during its first three
months of pre-commercial operations._12_ **The unpermitted release was blamed
on “a combination of a failure in the management of change process, lack of
adherence to procedures, and lack of training” in LDEQ’s official
report.**_13_

Neither LDEQ nor Venture Global have provided an explanation for the flaring
that has been observed at Calcasieu Pass. Flaring is a major, preventable
source of planet-heating emissions and has been described as an “extraordinary
waste of economic value.” _14_ Moreover, in some cases, high rates of flaring
at LNG facilities have been attributed to operational problems or
shutdowns._15_

### Faster Doesn’t Always Equal Better

**Venture Global touts holding the global record for the “fastest large-scale
greenfield LNG facility to ever be built,” but at what cost to performance and
safety?**_16_ Venture Global has proven unable to operate just one LNG
facility without problems, but they are planning to build three more that
would increase annual export capacity by roughly a factor of seven.

Out of these, Plaquemines LNG is the furthest along, and its safety outlook is
perhaps even bleaker. According to the former deputy director of Louisiana
State University’s Hurricane Center, major hurricanes could flood the site,
dislodge gas storage tanks, and release dangerous liquified gas and
chemicals._17_

* * *

### References

  1. Reuters Staff. 2023. “Venture Global LNG delays commercial ops at Calcasieu in Louisiana.” _Reuters._ March 31. [https://www.reuters.com/article/usa-venture-global-lng-calcasieu-louisia/venture-global-lng-delays-commercial-ops-at-calcasieu-in-louisiana-idINL1N3631NH](https://www.reuters.com/article/usa-venture-global-lng-calcasieu-louisia/venture-global-lng-delays-commercial-ops-at-calcasieu-in-louisiana-idINL1N3631NH)
  2. Baker Hughes. “Case Study: Successful Virtual String Test for Venture Global’s Calcasieu Pass LNG project.” Accessed April 12, 2023. [https://www.bakerhughes.com/sites/bakerhughes/files/2021-03/BakerHughes_Case_VentureGlobal_VirturalStringTest-051420.pdf](https://www.bakerhughes.com/sites/bakerhughes/files/2021-03/BakerHughes_Case_VentureGlobal_VirturalStringTest-051420.pdf)
  3. _Ibid._
  4. This quote appears on the “About” page of Venture Global’s website and can be found in archived versions of the website dating back to May 24, 2016. [https://web.archive.org/web/https://venturegloballng.com/about/](https://web.archive.org/web/https://venturegloballng.com/about/)
  5. Baker Hughes. “Case Study: Successful Virtual String Test for Venture Global’s Calcasieu Pass LNG project.”
  6. _Ibid._
  7. Louisiana Bucket Brigade. 2023. _Gas Export Spotlight: Operational Problems at Cameron LNG and Calcasieu Pass._ January 10. [https://labucketbrigade.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/01/Gas_Export_Spotlight_CameronCalcasieuPass.pdf](https://labucketbrigade.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/01/Gas_Export_Spotlight_CameronCalcasieuPass.pdf)
  8. Louisiana Bucket Brigade. 2022. _Gas Export Spotlight: Venture Global Calcasieu Pass Facility Accidents January 18 – May 31, 2022._ June 15. [_https://labucketbrigade.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/06/LABB-Gas-Export-Spotlight-Report.pdf_](https://labucketbrigade.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/06/LABB-Gas-Export-Spotlight-Report.pdf)
  9. Louisiana Bucket Brigade. 2023.
  10. NOAA, the Payne Institute at the Colorado School of Mines, World Bank/GGFR Oil production – EIA. “Dataset: 2012 – 2022 Flare Volume and Flaring Intensity Estimates by Economy.” Accessed April 11, 2023. [https://thedocs.worldbank.org/en/doc/1ccd33e2f13ebc7cfd9647fdebc843f2-0400072023/related/DATA-World-Bank-Gas-Flaring-Data-2012-2022.xlsx](https://thedocs.worldbank.org/en/doc/1ccd33e2f13ebc7cfd9647fdebc843f2-0400072023/related/DATA-World-Bank-Gas-Flaring-Data-2012-2022.xlsx)
  11. _Ibid_.
  12. Document ID 13206986 (Inspection Date: 3/22/2022; T-206737; Unauthorized Discharge above RQ) and Document ID 13277007 (30 Day follow up Report – Release of Natural Gas), Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality (LDEQ). Accessed April 11, 2023. [https://edms.deq.louisiana.gov/app/doc/view?doc=13206986](https://edms.deq.louisiana.gov/app/doc/view?doc=13206986) and [https://edms.deq.louisiana.gov/app/doc/view?doc=13277007](https://edms.deq.louisiana.gov/app/doc/view?doc=13277007)
  13. LDEQ Document ID 13206986.
  14. Schulz, R. and T. Bredariol. _Flaring Emissions — Technology Deep Dive._ International Energy Agency. Accessed April 12, 2023. [https://www.iea.org/reports/flaring-emissions](https://www.iea.org/reports/flaring-emissions)
  15. Charles, J. and M. Davis. 2021. “Gas flaring within the global LNG supply chain – insights from real-time analytics.” FlareIntel. July 20, 2021. [https://flareintel.com/insights/transparency-into-gas-flaring-within-the-global-lng-supply-chain](https://flareintel.com/insights/transparency-into-gas-flaring-within-the-global-lng-supply-chain)
  16. Venture Global. 2022. “Press Release: Venture Global LNG And JERA Announce Departure Of Inaugural Commissioning Cargo From Calcasieu Pass.” March 1. [https://venturegloballng.com/press/venture-global-lng-and-jera-announce-departure-of-inaugural-commissioning-cargo-from-calcasieu-pass/](https://venturegloballng.com/press/venture-global-lng-and-jera-announce-departure-of-inaugural-commissioning-cargo-from-calcasieu-pass/)
  17. Sneath, Sarah. 2023. “Fossil Fuel Firms Use Permitting Loopholes to Fast-Track LNG Export Projects Near Black Communities.” _DeSmog_. March 23. [https://www.desmog.com/2023/03/24/lng-export-terminals-permitting-loopholes-black-communities-louisiana-florida-venture-global-nopetro/](https://www.desmog.com/2023/03/24/lng-export-terminals-permitting-loopholes-black-communities-louisiana-florida-venture-global-nopetro/)

