# What are LNG Exports?

Thanks to the fracking revolution that began over a decade ago, the U.S. has
become the world’s largest methane gas producer.

Methane or fossil gas (usually called “natural” gas in the U.S.) is a fossil
fuel that is used to generate electrical power, heat buildings, and power
heavy industry. Thanks to the fracking revolution that began over a decade
ago, [the U.S. has become the world’s largest methane gas
producer](https://www.eia.gov/international/rankings/world?pa=287&u=2&f=A&v=none&y=01%2F01%2F2021).
Since 2017, the U.S. has shifted from importing gas to producing more gas than
it consumes, and is now exporting the surplus to other countries.

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/801dc379-lng-1.png)

Methane gas is most easily transported by pipeline, and as a result the U.S.
trades a lot of gas by pipeline to both Canada and Mexico. But increasingly,
the surplus gas we extract is being turned into Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG),
loaded onto specialized tankers, and shipped around the world. Chilling
methane gas to a temperature of negative 260°F turns it into a liquid with a
volume 600 times smaller. This makes it [possible to transport LNG by
ship](https://www.eia.gov/energyexplained/natural-gas/liquefied-natural-
gas.php). The gas must then be kept in this super-chilled form for the entire
ocean voyage until it reaches its destination where it is turned back into
gaseous form, or “regasified.”

Each stage of this complex process is extremely energy intensive, and as a
result, LNG has [very high lifecycle greenhouse gas
emissions](https://www.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/sailing-nowhere-liquefied-
natural-gas-report.pdf) – almost as bad as coal. Gas is transformed into LNG
at export terminals, mostly located along the U.S. Gulf Coast, using complex
equipment known as “liquefaction trains.” The first shipment of U.S. LNG
occurred in 2016, and since then [exports have
increased](https://www.energy.gov/fecm/listings/lng-reports) as fast as the
industry can build export capacity. The U.S. is now the [world’s largest LNG
exporter](https://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=55741).

![](https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-usa-
stateless/2024/11/3e3c7fc8-lng-2.png)

U.S. [LNG exports are primarily shipped to Asia and
Europe](https://www.eia.gov/dnav/ng/ng_move_expc_s1_a.htm). Top importing
countries include South Korea, China, Japan, India, Spain, United Kingdom,
Netherlands, and France. In 2022, following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, LNG
shipments to Europe surged, as we discuss in our recent report. (**To read
Greenpeace International’s report on shipments of U.S. LNG to Europe,
click**[**here**](https://www.greenpeace.org/international/who-profits-from-
war/)**.**)

The process of extracting oil and gas, commonly known as fracking, also leads
to local air and water pollution that can harm nearby communities. For this
and other reasons, fracking is banned in many European countries, including
several that import LNG from fracked gas. The public health harms of gas
production [disproportionately fall on Black, Brown, Indigenous and poor
communities](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/reports/fossil-fuel-racism/).

Numerous new export terminals are under construction or in the planning stage.
If built, these terminals would facilitate a [big increase in LNG
exports](https://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=56320) over the next
few decades and [put our climate goals at
risk](https://climateactiontracker.org/documents/1094/CAT_2022-11-10_GlobalUpdate_COP27.pdf).

(Return to [LNG 101 main
page](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/research/liquefied-natural-gas-
exports-101/))

